Back to the question, specifically, how do you bring back the jobs? American manufacturers, how do you bring the jobs back? 
Folks, let me -- 
Good evening from Hofstra university in Hempstead, new York, I'm Lester holt, anchor of "NBC nightly news." I want to welcome you to the first presidential debate. The participants are Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton. This debate is sponsored by a nonpartisan commission. The commission drafted tonight's format and the rules have been agreed to by the campaigns. The 90-minute debate is divided into six segments, each 15 minutes long. We'll explore three topics area tonight, achieving prosperity, America's direction and securing America. At the start of each segment, I will ask the same lead-off question to both candidates and they will have up to two minutes to respond. The questions have not been shared with the commission or the campaigns. The audience here in the room has agreed to remain silence so that we can focus on what the candidates are saying. I will invite you to applaud, however, at this moment as we welcome the candidates, Democrat nominee for president of the United States, Hillary Clinton and Republican nominee for president of the United States Donald J. Trump. Well, I don't expect us to cover all of the issues of this campaign tonight but I remind everyone, there are two more presidential debates scheduled. We are going to focus on many of the issues that voters tell us are most important and we're going to press for specifics. I am honored to have this role but this evening belongs to the candidates and just as important to the American people. Candidates, we look forward to hearing you articulate your policies and your positions as well as your visions and your values. So, let's begin. We're calling this opening segment achieving prosperity and central to that is jobs. There are two economic realities in America today. There's been a record six straight years of job growth and new census numbers show income has increased at a record rate after years of stagnation. However, income inequality remains stagnant and Americans are living paycheck to paycheck. Beginning with you secretary Clinton, why are you a better choice than your opponent to create the kind of jobs that put more money into the pockets of American workers. 
He also raised the issue of your e-mails. Do you want to respond to that? 
I'll let her answer that. Let me admonish the audience one more time. There was an agreement. We asked you to be silent. It would be helpful for us. Secretary Clinton? 
I'll let you respond, it's important, but I just want to get answer — the birth certificate was produced in 2011. You continued to tell the story and question the president's legitimacy in 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, as recently as January. So the question is, what changed your mind? 
I'm sorry, I will let you respond to that. There's a lot there. But we're talking about racial healing in this statement. 
I'm sorry. This is Secretary Clinton's two minutes. 
Let me follow up with Mr. Trump, if I can. You've talked about creating 25 million jobs and you've promised to bring back millions of jobs for Americans. How are we going to bring back the industries that have left this country for cheaper labor overseas? How specifically are you going to tell American manufacturers that you have to come back? 
Let me get you to pause right there. 
Let me interrupt a moment. 
Let's let her respond. 
Mr. Trump, we're talking about the burden that Americans have to pay yet you have not released your tax returns and the reason nominees have released their returns for decades is so that voters will know if their potential president owes money, who he owes it to and any business conflicts. Don't Americans have a right to know if there are any conflicts of interest. 
Mr. Trump, you can respond. And we're going to move on to the next segment. 
Mr. Trump, you have two minutes in the same question. 
Mr. Trump, you have two minutes. How do you heal the divide? 
Mr. Trump? 
Mr. Trump? 
My reference is to what you said in 2002. 
One of you will not win this election, are you willing to accept the outcome as the will of the voters?
Our next segment is called securing America. We want to start with a 21st century war happening every day in this country, our institutions are under cyber attack, and our secrets are being stolen. So my question is who's behind it and how do we fight it? Secretary Clinton, this goes to you. 
Please respond, then I have a follow up question. 
Please, very quickly. 
Respond. 
Secretary -- 
Secretary Clinton, thank you. Mr. Trump, the same question to you. It's about putting money -- more money into the pockets of American workers. You have up to two minutes. 
Secretary Clinton, would you like to respond? 
Secretary Clinton? 
Secretary Clinton? 
Secretary Clinton? 
Secretary Clinton? 
So it's negotiable? 
Ten seconds. 
That is going to do it for us. That concludes our debate for this evening, a spirited one. We covered a lot of ground. Not everything as I suspected we would. The next presidential debates are scheduled for October 9th at Washington university in St. Louis and October 19th at the university of Las Vegas. A vice presidential debate is October 4th in farmville, Virginia. My thanks to Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton and Hofstra university for lasting us tonight, good night, everyone.
The argument is that it's a form of racial profiling. 
The quote was I just don't think she has a presidential look. 
This conversation is about race. 
This is Secretary Clinton's two minutes, please. 
This year, Secretary Clinton became the first woman nominated from a major party. Earlier you said she doesn't have a presidential look, she's standing here what did you mean by that? 
Trump, a lot of these judgment questions. You supported the war in Iraq. 
Two minutes is expired. 
Very quickly. 
We are at the final question. 
We have just a --
We have just a few final questions. 
We need to move on. 
We're going to move to -- 
We're well behind schedule so I'm going to move to our next segment. We move into our next segment talking about America's direction and let's talk about race. The share of Americans who say race relations are bad in this country is the highest it's been in decades. Much of I amplified by shootings in Arkansas and Tulsa. How do you heal the divide? Secretary Clinton, you get two minutes on this. 
Which leads to the last subject. We're on the subject of securing America. On nuclear war, President Obama considered changing the policy on first use. Do you support that? 
Why -- 
Why is your judgment any different than Mrs. Clinton's? 
Will you accept the outcome as the will of the voters? 
Will you accept the outcome of the election? 
You are unpacking a lot here and we're still on the issue here of achieving prosperity and I want to talk about taxes, the fundamental difference between the two of you concerns the wealthy. Secretary Clinton, you're calling for an increase of taxes on the wealthiest and Mr. Trump, you're calling on tax cuts for the wealthy. I'd like for you to defend that and this next two-minute answer goes to you, Mr. Trump. Trump They are going to expand their companies and do a tremendous job. I'm getting rid of the great thing for the wealthy, it's a great thing for the middle class and for companies to expand and when these people are going to put billions and billions of dollars into companies and when they are going to bring $2.5 trillion back from overseas where they can't bring the money back because politicians like secretary Clinton won't allow them to bring the money back because the taxes are so onerous and the bureaucratic red tape, it's so bad. So what they are doing is leaving our country and, believe it or not, they are leaving because taxes are too high and because some of them have lots of money outside of our country and instead of bringing it back and putting the money to work because they can't work out a deal and everybody agrees it should be brought back, instead of that, they are leaving our country to get their money because they can't bring their money back into our country because of bureaucratic red tape, because they can't get together. Because we have a president that can't sit them around a table and get them to approve something and here's the thing, Republicans and Democrats agree that this should be done. 2.5 trillion. I happen to think it's double that. It's probably $5 trillion that we can't bring into our country, Lester, and with a little leadership, you'd get it in here very quickly and it could be put to use on the inner cities and lots of other things and it would be beautiful. But we have no leadership. And honestly, that starts with secretary Clinton. 
You have two minutes on the same question to defend tax increases of the wealthiest Americans, secretary Clinton. 
You mentioned ISIS, and we think of ISIS certainly as "Over there", but there are American citizens who have been inspired to commit acts of terror on American soil. For instance the recent attacks in New Jersey and New York and deadly attacks in San Bernardino and Orlando. Tell us specifically how you would prevent home-grown attacks by American citizens. Mr. Trump? 
You said we need do everything possible to improve policing to go right at implicit bias. Do you think police are implicitly biased against black people? 
Your two minutes expired but I want to follow up. Stop and frisk was ruled unconstitutional in New York because it largely singled out black and hispanic -- 