30 seconds and then we'll go on. 
All I said is they may have to defend themselves or help us out. We're a country that owes $20 trillion. They have to help us out. Nuclear is concerned, I agree. It is the single greatest threat.
And all of a sudden you were against it. 
And take a look at mine, also. 
And that is before the war started. Sean hannity said very strongly, to me and other people, he's willing to say, but nobody wants to call him, I was against the war. He said you used to have fights with me, because Sean was in favor of the war. And I understand that side also. Not very much, because we should have never been there, but nobody called Sean hannity. And then they did an article in a major magazine, shortly after the war started. I think in '04. But they did an article, which had me totally against the war in Iraq. And one of your compatriots said, you know, whether it was before or right after, trump was, because if you read this article, there's no doubt. But if somebody, and I'll ask the press, if somebody would call up Sean hannity, this was before the war started. He and I used to have arguments about the war. I said it's a terrible and a stupid thing. It's going to destabilize the Middle East. And that exactly what this's done. 
But I will tell you, Hillary tell you to go to her website and read all about how to defeat ISIS. Right now it's getting tougher and tougher to defeat them, because they're in more and more places and it's a big problem, and as far as Japan is concerned, I want to help all of our allies. But we are losing billions and billions of dollars. We cannot be the policeman of the world. We cannot protect countries all over the world. 
But you have no plan. 
Did you ask me a question? You have to be able to negotiate our trade deals. You have to be able to negotiate. That's right. With Japan, with Saudi Arabia. I mine, can you imagine, we're defending Saudi Arabia and with all of the money they have, we're defending them, and they're not paying, all you have to do is speak to them. Wait, you have so many different things, you have to be able to do, and I don't believe that Hillary has the stamina.
Excuse me. I will bring back jobs. You can't bring back jobs. 
Excuse me. Your husband signed NAFTA, which was one of the worst things that ever happened. 
Extremely rough to Hillary, to her family, and I said to myself, I can't do it. I just can't do it. It's inappropriate. It's not nice. But she's hundreds of millions of dollars on negative ads even me, many of which are untrue, and they're misrepresentations, and I will tell you this, Lester, it's not nice, and I don't deserve that, but it's certainly not a nice thing that she's done. Hundreds of millions of ads. The only gratifying thing is I, and with $200 million spent, and I'm either winning or tied.
Facts. 
First I have to say one thing very important. Secretary Clinton is talking about taking out ISIS. We will take out ISIS. Well, president Obama and secretary Clinton created a vacuum the way they got out of Iraq, because they got out, they shouldn't have been in, but once they got in, the way think got -- they got out was a disaster. She's been trying to take them out for a long time. But they wouldn't even have been formed if they left some troops behind. Like 10,000 or maybe something more than that. And then you wouldn't have had them. Or, as I've been saying for a long time, and I think you'll agree, because I said it to you once, had we taken the oil, and we should have taken the oil, ISIS would not have been able to form either, because the oil was their primary source of income. And now they have the oil all over the place, including the oil, a lot of the oil in Libya. Which was another one of her disasters. 
First of all, secretary Clinton doesn't want to use a couple of words. And that's law and order. We need law and order. If we don't have it, we're not going to have a country. And when I look at what's going on in Charlotte, a city I love, a city where I have investments, when I look at what's going on in various parts of our country, I could keep naming them all day long, we need law and order in our country. And I just got today the -- as you know, the endorsement of the fraternal order of police, it just came in. We have endorsements from I think almost every police group -- very -- a large percentage of them in the united States. We have a situation where we have our inner cities, African-Americans, hispanics are living in hell because it's so dangerous. You walk down the street, you get shot. In Chicago, they've had thousands of shootings, thousands since January 1st. Thousands of shootings. And I'm saying, where is this? Is this a war-torn country? What are we doing? And we have to stop the violence, we have to bring back law and order in a place like Chicago where thousands of people have been killed, thousands over the last number of years. In fact, almost 4,000 have been killed since Barack Obama became president, over 4 -- almost 4,000 people in Chicago have been killed. We have to bring back law and order. Now, whether or not in a place like Chicago you do stop and frisk, which worked very well, mayor Giuliani is here, worked well in New York, brought the crime way down. But you take the gun away from criminals that shouldn't be having it. We have gangs roaming the street and in many cases they are illegally here, illegal immigrants, and they have guns and they shoot people. We have to be very strong and we have to be very vigilant. We have to know what we're doing. Right now, our police, in many cases, are afraid to do anything. We have to protect our inner cities because African-American communities are being decimated by crime. 
First of all, you don't let the companies leave. The companies are leaving. There are thousands of them. They are leaving and they are leaving in bigger numbers than ever. And what you do is you say, fine, you want to go to Mexico or some other country, good luck. We wish you a lot of luck. If you think you're going to make your air conditioners or your cars or cookies or whatever you make and bring them into our country without a tax, you're wrong. And once you say you're going to have to tax them coming in and our politicians never do this because they have special interests and special interests want those companies to leave because in many cases they own the companies. So what I'm saying is, we can stop them from leaving. We have to stop them from leaving. And that's a big, big factor.Holt Let me let secretary answer here. 
He approved nafta which is the single worst trade deal in this country. 
Hillary is hitting me with tremendous commercials. Some of it's in entertainment. Somebody who's been very tough to me, Rosie O'donnell. But you want to know the truth? I was going to say something -- 
How much for my family? Lester? How much? 
I did not. I do not say that. 
I do want to say that I was just endorsed and more are coming next week, it will be over 200 admirals. Many of them are here, admirals and generals endorsed me to lead this country. That just happened. And many more are coming. And I'm very proud of it. In addition, I was just endorse the by ice. So when secretary Clinton talks about I'll take the admirals and generals any day over the political hacks. Look at the mess that we're in. Look at the mess that we're in. As far as the cyber, I agree to parts of what secretary Clinton said, we should be better than anybody else, and perhaps we're not. I don't know if we know it was Russia who broke into the DNC. She's saying Russia, Russia, Russia. Maybe it was. It could also be China, it could be someone sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds. You don't know who broke into DNC, but what did we learn? We learn that Bernie Sanders was taken advantage of by your people. By Debbie Wasserman Schultz. Look what happened to her. But Bernie Sanders was taken advantage of. Now, whether that was Russia, whether that was China, whether it was another country, we don't know, because the truth is, under president Obama we've lost control of things that we used to have control over. We came in with an internet, we came up with the internet. And I think secretary Clinton and myself would agree very much, when you look at what ISIS is doing with the internet, they're beating us at our own game. ISIS. So we have to get very, very tough on cyber and cyber warfare. It is a, it is a huge problem. I have a son. He's 10 years old. He has computers. He is so good with these computers, it's unbelievable. The security aspect of cyber is very, very tough. And maybe it's hardly do-able. But I will say, we are not doing the job we should be doing, but that's true throughout our whole governmental society. We have so many things that we have to do better, Lester and certainly cyber is one of them. 
I don't mind releasing. I'm under a routine audit. It will be released as soon as the audit is complete but you will learn more about Donald Trump by going down to the federal elections where I filed a 104-page essentially financial statement of sorts, the forms that they have. It shows income, in fact, the income, I just looked today, the income is filed at $694 million for this past year. 694 million. If you would have told me I was going to make that 15 or 20 years ago, I would have been very surprised but that's the kind of thinking that our country needs. When we have a country that's doing so badly, that's being ripped off by every single country in the world, it's the kind of thinking that our country needs because everybody -- Lester, we have a trade deficit with all of the countries that we do business with of almost $800 billion a year. You know what that is? Who is negotiating these trade deals? We have people that are political hacks negotiating our trade deals. 
I have better judgment, I also have a much better temperament than she does, you know? I have a much better. She spent, let me tell you. She spent hundreds of millions of dollars on an advertising, you know, they get Madison avenue into a room. Temperament, let's go after. I think my strongest asset, maybe by far is my temperament. I have a winning temperament. I know how to win. She does not. 
I have to say, what Secretary Clinton was saying about nuclear aggression. Russia has been expanding there, they have a much newer capability than we do. We have not been updating from the new standpoint. I looked the other night, I was seeing B-52s that your father, your grandfather could be flying them. We are not keeping up with other countries. I'd like everybody to end it, just get rid of it, but I would certainly not do first strike. I think once the nuclear alternative happens, it's over. At the same time, we have to be prepared. I can't take anything off the table. Because you look at some of these countries. You look at North Korea, we're doing nothing there. China should solve that problem for us. China should go into north Korea, China is totally powerful as it relates to North Korea. And by the way, another one powerful is the worst deal I think I've ever seen negotiated that you started as the Iran deal, Iran is one of their biggest trading partners. Iran has power over North Korea. And when they made that horrible deal with Iran, they ought to have included the fact that they do something with respect to North Korea and Yemen and all these other places, and when asked to secretary Kerry, why didn't you do that? One eat giveaways of all time, including $400 million in cash. Nobody's ever seen that of about, that turned out to be wrong, it was actually $1.7 billion in cash. Obviously, I guess for the hostages, it certainly looks that way. Why didn't they make the right deal? This is one of the worse deal the made by any country in history. The deal with Iran will lead to nuclear problems, all they have to do is sit back 10 years, and they don't have to do much. I met with Bibi Netanyahu. He's not a happy camper. 
I never said that. 
I say nothing, because I was able to get him to produce it. He should have produced it a long time before. I say nothing, but when you talk about healing, I think that I've developed very, very good relationships, over the last little while with the African-American community, I think you can see that. And I feel that they really wanted me to come to that conclusion, and I think I did a great job and a great service, not only for the country, but even for the president in getting him to produce his birth certificate. 
I think I should — you go to — She's going to raise taxes $1.3 trillion. Look at her website. It's no different than this. She's telling us how to fight ISIS. She tells you how to fight ISIS on her website. I don't think General MacArthur would like that too much. 
I told you, I'll release them after the audit. I've been under audit for almost 15 years. I know a lot of wealthy people that have never been audited. I get audited every year. In a way, I should be complaining. I don't mind it. It's a way of life. I get audited by the IRS. Other people don't. I will say this. We have a situation in this country that has to be taken care of. I will release my tax returns, against my lawyer's wishes, when she releases her 33,000 e-mails that have been deleted. As soon as she releases them, I will release my tax returns and that's against my lawyers say don't do it. I will say this. In fact, watching shows to reading the papers, almost every lawyer says you don't release your returns until the audit is complete. When the audit's complete, I'll do it. But I would go against them if -- 
I want to make America great again. The other day we were deporting 800 people. Perhaps they pressed the wrong button, or perhaps worse than that, it was corruption. These people we were going to deport ended up becoming citizens. End the up becoming citizens, and it's 800, and now it turns out, it might be 1800, and they don't even know. 
I'd like that respond. I got to watch in preparing for your debates for Barack Obama you treated him with terrible disrespect. And I watch the way you talk now about how lovely everything is. It doesn't work that way. Were you after him, you were trying to, you even sent out pictures of him in a certain garb, very famous pictures, I don't think you can deny that. But just last week your campaign manager said it was true. So when you try to act ier than thou, it really doesn't work. As far as the lawsuit, yes, when I was very young, I went into my father's company. And we, along with many, many other companies throughout the country were sued. We settled the suit with no admission of guilt. Zero. I notice the nasty commercials that you do on me in so many different ways, which I don't do on you, maybe I'm trying to save the money, but frankly, I look at that, and I say, isn't that amazing, because I settled that lawsuit, with no admission of guilt. But that was a lawsuit brought against many real estate firms, and it's just one of those things, I'll go one step further. In palm beach, Florida, tough community, a brilliant community, probably the wealthiest in the world. I opened a club, and really got great credit for it. No discrimination against African-Americans, against muslims, against anybody. And it's a tremendously successful club, and I'm so glad I did it, and I have been given great credit for what I did. And I'm very, very proud of it. And that's the way I feel. That is the true way I feel. 
I'd like to respond if I might. 
I'd like to respond to that. Police. First of all, I agree, and a lot of people even within my own party want to give certain rights to people on watch lists and no fly lists. A person is on a watch list or no-fly list, and I have the endorsement of the NRA. But we have to look very strongly at no-fly lists and watch lists, and when people are on there, even if they shouldn't be on there, we'll help them legally, we'll help them get off , but I tend to agree with that. But I want to bring up the fact that you were the one who brought up the term super predator about young black youth. And that's a term that's been horribly met. I think you've apologized for it. But I think it was a terrible thing to say, and when it comes to stop and frisk, you know, you're talking about taking guns away, I'm talking about taking guns away from gangs and people that use them. And I don't really think you disagree with me on this if you want to know the truth. Maybe there's a political reason why you can't say it, but I really don't believe -- in New York City we had 2,200 murders and stop and frisk brought it down to 500 murders. 500 muis a lot of murders, hard to believe, like 500 is supposed to be good? But we went from 2200 to 500, and it was continued on by mayor Bloomberg, discontinued by the current mayor. So when you say it has no impact, it really did. It had a very, very big impact. 
I'll tell you, very simple to say. Sidney Blumenthal works for the campaign and close are, very close friend of secretary Clinton. And her campaign manager, Patty Doyle, went to, during the campaign, her campaign against Obama — Patty Doyle was on wolf Blitzer, saying that this happened. Blumenthal sent McClatchy, highly respected reporter to Kenya to find out about it. They were pressing it very hard. She failed to get the birth certificate. When I got involved, I didn't fail. I got him to give the birth certificate. So I'm satisfied with it, and I'll tell you why I'm satisfied with it, because I want to get on to defeating ISIS. Because I want to get on to creating jobs. Because I want to get on to having a strong border. Because I want to get on to things that are very important to me, and that are very important to the country. 
I'm going to make America great again. I will be able to do it. If she wins, I will absolutely support her. 
It does not show that. The record shows that I'm right. When I did an interview with Howard Stern, very lightly, first time anybody's asked me, I said who knows. Essentially, I then did an interview Neil caview toe. I had numerous conversations with Sean hannity at fox, and he called me the other day and I spoke to him about it. He said you were totally, because he was for the war. 
It would be squandered, too, believe me. 
It's not an accurate one at all. Not an accurate one. I want to give a lot of things. I agree with her on one thing. The single greatest problem the world has is nuclear armament, nuclear weapons. Not global warming, like you think and your president thinks. Nuclear is the greatest threat. Just to go down the list, we defend Japan. We defend Germany. We defend South Korea, we defend Saudi Arabia. We defend countries. They do not pay us what they should be paying us, because we are providing tremendous service and losing a fortune. We lose on everything. I say who makes these? We lose on everything. What I said, it's very possible that if they don't pay a fair share, because this is isn't 40 years ago where we could do what we're doing. We can't defend Japan, a behemoth selling us cars by the millions. 
It's not negotiable, no. Why did she delete 33,000 -- 
Let me just tell you. 
Look, it's all words. It's all sound bites. I built an unbelievable company, some of the greatest assets anywhere in the world, real estate assets in the world beyond the United States and it's an unbelievable company. But on occasion, four times, we used certain laws that are there and when secretary Clinton talks about people that didn't get paid, first of all, they did get paid a lot but taking advantage of the laws of the nation. Now, if you want to change the laws, you've been there a long time, change the laws. But take advantage of the laws of the nation because I'm running a company. My obligation right now is to do well for myself, my family, my employees, for my companies. And that's what I do. But what she doesn't say is the tens of thousands of people that are unbelievably happy and they love me. I'll give you an example. We're just opening up on Pennsylvania avenue right next to the white house so if I don't get there one way, I'm going to get to Pennsylvania avenue another. But we're opening the old post office. Under budget, ahead of schedule, saved tremendous money, I'm a year ahead of schedule and that's what this country should be doing. We build roads and they cost two and three and four times what they are supposed to cost. We buy products for our military and they come at costs so far above what they are supposed to be because we don't have people that know what they are doing. When we look at the budget, the budget is bad to a large extent because we have people that have no idea as to what to do and how to buy. The trump international is way under budget and way ahead of schedule and we should be able to do that for our country. 
Look, the African-American community has been let down by our politicians. They talk good around election time, like right now. And after the election they say see you later, I'll see you in four year of the African American community, they've been abused and used in order to get votes by Democrats and politicians. They've controlled these commuties for up to 100 years. I'll tell you, you look at the inner cities, and I left Detroit and Philadelphia and you've seep me. I've been all over the place. You decided to stay home, and that's okay. But I will tell you. I've been all over, and I've met some of the greatest people I'll ever meet within these communities, and they are very, very upset with what their politicians have told them and what their politicians have done. 
Maybe he didn't do a good job and I was unsatisfied with his work, which our country should do, too. 
Murders are up. You check it. 
No, you're telling the enemy everything you want to do. No wonder you've been fighting ISIS your entire adult life. 
No, you're wrong. It went before a judge who was a very against police judge. It was taken away from her and our mayor, our new mayor, refused to go forward with the case. They would have won on appeal. If you look at it throughout the country, there are -- 
No. The argument is that we have to take the gun ace way from these people that have them and are bad people and shouldn't have them. These are felons. These are people that are bad people that shouldn't be -- when you have 3,000 shootings in Chicago from January 1st, when you have 4,000 people killed in Chicago by guns from the beginning of the presidency of Barack Obama, his hometown, you have to have stop and frisk. You need more police. You need a better community, you know, relation. You don't have good community relations in Chicago. It's terrible. I have property there. It's terrible what's going on in Chicago. And Chicago's not the only one. You go to Ferguson, so many other places. You need better relationships. I agree with secretary Clinton on this. You need better relationships. You need better relationships between the community and police, but you look at Dallas where the relationships were a beautiful thing. And then five police officers were killed. One night very violently. So there's some bad things going on.Some really bad things. But we need, Lester, we need law and order, and we need law and order in the inner cities. Because the people that are most affected by what's happening are African-American and hispanic speech, and it's very unfair to them what our politicians are allowing to happen. 
Not. 
Oh. 
One thing I'd like to say. 
Secretary Clinton and others, politicians, should have been doing this for years, not right now because of the fact that we've created a movement. They should have been doing this for years. What's happened to our jobs and our country and our economy generally is -- look, we owe $20 trillion. We can't do it any longer. 
Secretary, you have no plan. 
She didn't say that, because she has no business ability. We need heart, we need a lot of things, but you have to have some basic ability. And sadly, she doesn't have that. All of the things that she's talking about could have been taken care of during the last ten years, let's say, while she has great power, but they weren't taken care. And if she ever wins this race, they won't be taken care of. 
She doesn't have the look. She doesn't have the stamina. I said shy doesn't have the stamina, and I don't believe she does have the stamina. To be president of this country, you need tremendous stamina. 
She talks about solar panels. We invested in a solar company. They lost plenty of money on that one. Look, I'm a great believer in all foms of energy but we're putting a lot of people out of work. Our energy policies are a disaster. Our country is losing so much in terms of energy and paying off our debt. You can't look at what you're planning to do with 20 trillion in debt. The Obama administration, from the time they have come in, is over 230 years worth of debt and he's topped it. He's doubled it in a course of almost eight years, 7 1/2 years, to be semiexact. So I will tell you this, we have to do a much better job at keeping our jobs. And we have to do a much better job at giving companies incentives to build new companies to expand because they are not doing it. And all you have to do is look at Michigan and look at Ohio and look at all of these places where so many of their jobs and their companies are just leaving. They are gone. And Hillary, I'd just ask you this. You've been doing this for 30 years. Why are you just thinking about these solutions right now? For 30 years you've been doing it and now you are just starting to think of solutions. 
So is it president Obama's fault? 
So is it president Obama's fault? Is it president Obama's fault? 
Thank you, Lester. Our jobs are fleeing the country. They are going to Mexico, they are going to many other countries. You look at what China is doing to our country in terms of making our product. They are devaluing their currency and there's nobody in our government to fight them and we have a very good fight and we have a winning fight because they are using our country as a piggy bank to rebuild China and many other countries are doing the same thing. So we're losing our good jobs, so many of them. When you look at what is happening in Mexico, a friend of mine who builds plants says it's the eighth wonder of the world, that bigging the bigger plants in the world, the most sophisticated, some of the best plants, with the United States, as we said, not so much. So Ford is leaving. You see that, a small car division leaving. Thousands of jobs leaving Michigan, leaving Ohio, they are all leaving. And we can't allow it to happen anymore. As far as child care is concerned and so many other things, I think Hillary and I agree on that. We probably disagree a little bit as to numbers and amounts and what we're going to do but perhaps we'll be talking about that later. But we have to stop our jobs from being stolen from us.We have to stop our companies from leaving the United States and with it, firing all of their people. All you have to do is take a look at carrier air conditioning in Indianapolis. They are going to Mexico. So many hundreds and hundreds of companies are doing this. We cannot let it happen. Under my plan, I'll be reducing taxes tremendously from 35% to 15% for companies, small and big businesses. That's going to be a job creator like we haven't seen since Ronald Reagan. It's going to be a beautiful thing to watch. Companies will come, they will build, they will expand, new companies will start and I look very, very much forward to doing it. We have to renegotiate our trade deals and we have to stop these countries from stealing our companies and our jobs. 
That is a mainstream media nonsense put out by her, because she frankly, I think the best person in her campaign is mainstream media. Would you like to hear? I was against the war, wait a minute. I was against the war in Iraq. Just so you put it out. 
That makes me smart. 
That was more than a mistake. That was done purposely. Okay? That was not a mistake. That was done purposely. When you have your staff taking the fifth amendment, taking the fifth so they are not prosecuted, when you have the man that set up the illegal server taking the fifth, I think it's disgraceful. And believe me, this country thinks it's disgraceful -- really thinks it's disgraceful, also. As far as my tax returns, you don't learn that much from tax returns. You learn a lot from financial disclosures. I'm extremely underleveraged. The report that said 650 -- by the way, my friends said boy that's not a lot of money relative to what I had. The buildings in question, actually, it wasn't a bad story, to be honest with you, but the buildings are worth $3.9 billion and the 650 isn't even on that. But it's not 650. It's much less than that. But I could give you a list of banks, if that would help you, I would give you list of banks, these are fine institutions. I'm very underleveraged. I have a great company and I have tremendous income. I say that not in a bragadocious way but it's time that this country has somebody running the country who has an idea about money. When we are $20 trillion in debt and our country is a mess. It's one thing to hav$20 trillion in debt and our airports and roads are good and -- our airports are like from a third world country. You land at Laguardia, Newark, L.A.X., and you come in from dubai and Qatar, you come in from China, you see these incredible airports, we've become a third-world country. So the worst of all things have happened. We owe $20 trial KREN trillion and we're a mess. Whether it's six or five but it looks like it's 6, $6 trillion in the Middle East we could have rebuilt our country twice and it's really a shame and it's politicians like secretary Clinton that have caused this problem. Our country has tremendous problems. We're a debtor nation, we're a serious debtor nation and we need new bridges, airports, schools, new hospitals and we don't have the money because it's been squandered on so many of your ideas. 
That would not start a war. 
That's called business, by the way. 
That's for sure. 
That's lies. 
The AFL-CIO, the other day, behind the blue screen, I don't know who you were talking to, Secretary, Clinton, but you were totally out of control. I said there's a person with a temperament that's got a problem. 
The secretary said I have strongly about working with, we've been working with them for many years, and we have the greatest mess anyone's ever seen. Under your direction, to a large extent. But you look at the Middle East. You started the Iran deal. That's another beauty where you have a country that was ready to fall, they were doing so badly. They were choking on the sanctions, and now they're probably going to be a major power at some point the way they're going. But when you look at nato, I was asked on a major show. You have to understand I'm a business person, I did well, but I have common sense. I said well, I'll tell you, I haven't given lots of thought to nato, many of them aren't paying their fair share. That bothers me, because yes, we're defending them, they should be at least paying us what they are supposed to be paying by treaty and contract. And number two, I said in very strongly, nato could be obsolete, because, and I was very strong on this, and it was actually covered very accurately in the "New York Times," which is unusual for the "New York Times" to be honest, but I said they do not focus on terror. And I was very strong. And I said it numerous times. And about four months ago, I read on the front page of the Wall Street journal that NATO is opening up a major terror division, and I think that's great. And I think we should get, because we pay approximately 73% of the cost of nato. It's a lot of money to protect other people. But I'm all for nato. But I said they have to focus on terror also. And they're going to do that. And that was, believe me, I'm sure I'm not going to get credit for it, but that was largely because of what I was saying and my criticism of nato. I think we have to get nato to go into the Middle East with us. In addition to surrounding nations, and we have to knock the hell out of ISIS. And we have to it fast. When ISIS formed in this vacuum created by Barack Obama and Secretary Clinton, and believe me, you were the ones that took out the troops. Not only that, you named the day. They sat back and 
The world. [Cheers and applause] Let me tell you. Let me tell you. Hillary has experience, but it's bad experience. We have made so many bad deals during the last -- [cheers and applause] So she has experience I agree. But it's bad experience, whether it's the Iran deal you're so in love with where we gave them $150 billion back.You almost can't name a good deal. She's got experience, but it's bad experience. And this country can't afford to have another four years of that kind of bad experience. [Cheers and applause] 
Then you didn't read it.
There's nothing crazy about not letting our companies bring their money back into the country. 
They were taunting us -- 
This argument is getting a little old. 
To the manufacturing industry. You go to new England, Ohio, Pennsylvania, you go anywhere you want, secretary Clinton, and you will see devastation where manufacturing is down 30, 40, sometimes 50%. Nafta is the worst trade deal maybe ever signed anywhere but certainly ever signed in this country and now you want to approve transpacific partnership. You were totally in favor of it and then you heard how I said how bad it was and if you win, you would approve it and it would be almost as bad as nafta. Nothing will ever top that. 
Typical politician, all talk, no action, sounds good, doesn't work, never going to happen. Our country is suffering because people like secretary Clinton have made such bad decisions in terms of our jobs and in terms of what's going on. Now, look, we have the worst revival of the economy since the great depression and, believe me, we're in a bubble right now. The only thing that looks good is the stock market but if you raise interest rates even a little bit, it's going to come crashing down. We're in a big, fat ugly bubble and we better be awfully careful and we have a fed doing political things. This Janet Yellen of the fed, the fed is doing political by keeping the interest rates at this level and, believe me, the day Obama goes off and he leaves and goes out to the golf course for the rest of his life to play golf, when they raise interest rates, you're going to see some very bad things happen because the fed is not doing their job. The fed is being more political than Secretary Clinton. 
Well, for one thing, and before we start on that, my father gave me a very small loan in 1975 and I built it into a company that's worth many, many billions of dollars with some of the greatest assets in the world and I say that because that's the kind of thinking our country needs. Our country is in deep trouble. We don't know what we're doing when it comes to devaluations and all of these countries all over the world, especially China, they are the best, the best ever at it. What they are doing to us is a very, very sad thing. So we have to do that. We have to renegotiate our trade deals. And Lester, they are taking our jobs, giving incentives, doing things that frankly we don't do. Let me give you an example of Mexico. They have a vat tax. We're in a different system.  When we sell into Mexico, there's a tax. When they sell an automatic 16% approximately -- when they sell into us, there's no tax. It's a defective agreement. It's been defective for a long time, many years. But the politicians haven't done anything about it. Now, in all fairness to secretary Clinton, yes, is that okay? Good. I want you to be very happy. It's very important to me. But in all fairness to secretary Clinton, when she started talking about this, it was really very recently. She's been doing this for 30 years. Why hasn't she made the agreements better? The nafta agreement is defective. 
Well, I'd have to respond. 
Well, nobody was pressing it. Nobody was caring much about it figured you'd asked question tonight, but I was one that got them to produce the birth certificate, and I think I did a good job. Secretary Clinton also fought it, you know everyone in mainstream's going to say that's not true. It's true. Sidney Blumenthal sent the reporter. You just have to take a look at CNN, the interview with your former campaign manager, and she was involved. But just like she can't bring back jobs, she can't produce. 
When they formed, this is something that never should have happened. It should never happened. Now you're talking about taking out ISIS. But you were there, and you were secretary of state when it was a little infant. Now it's in over 30 countries, and you're going to stop them? I don't think so. 
Where did you find this? 
Where they're not paying us what we need. 
Who gave it that name? Who gave it that name. 
Why not? 
Wrong. 
Wrong. 
Wrong. 
Wrong. 
Wrong. 
Yeah, for 30 years. 
You are going to approve one of the biggest tax increases in history. You are going to drive business out. Your regulations are a disaster and you're going to increase regulations all over the place. And by the way, my tax cut is the biggest since Ronald Reagan. I'm very proud of it. It will create tremendous numbers of new jobs. But regulations, you are going to regulate these businesses out of existence. When I go around -- Lester, I tell you this, I've been all over. And when I go around, despite the tax cut, the things that businesses and people like the most is the fact that I'm cutting regulation. You have regulations on top of regulations and new companies cannot form and old companies are going out of business and you want to increase the regulations and make them even worse. I'm going to cut regulations. I'm going to cut taxes big league and you're going to raise taxes big league. End of story. 
You called it the gold standard. You called it the gold standard of trade deals. 
You didn't hear what I said. 
You haven't done it in 30 years or 26 years or -- 
You said it's the finest deal you've ever seen. 
You're wrong. 
