Mr. Speaker Mr. President members of the minnesota legislature judges of the minnesota supreme court distinguished guests and fellow citizens of minnesota:
Yesterday you reconvened for the final weeks of the 68th legislative session that began more than a year ago.
This is not the beginning of your deliberations.
Nor will they end in these few weeks. For the work you take up again today is the continuation of anew approach to the legislative process in minnesota a recognition that responsive government requires our constant attention.

you are not assembled here after months of rest} but after months of hard work.
The times demand that kind of devotion.
It would be easy to be discouraged today} for this is a dark and frustrating time.
Many americans are pessimistic. Many americans are losing faith--not just in government} but in nearly all the institutions of our economic and political system.
That is not difficult to understand. For most} it is a struggle just to meet the payroll} or pay all the bills and make ends meet. Nine out of ten americans believe they will be worse off next year than they are now.
They do not believe government--or any institution--will help.
Still in the aftermath of a senseless war} they now see the blatant misuse of power in our national public life.

it is tempting to call this crisis national-for it is. But we dare not use that fact as an excuse. We must not evade our own responsibility or squander our opportunity to help the nation find its way.
So the question before us today is what we can do in minnesota in these final legislative weeks to address these problems and to bring back confidence. That question comes at a time when we are faced by the most frustrating single element of the crisis
our overpowering concern continues,to be the shortage of energy.
We still lack basic information that we know we can rely on.
The facts seem to change almost every day on any part of the problem you might ask about.
After.All this time the magnitude of the problem ranges from zero to disaster depending on who is describing it at the moment.
Congressman john zwach expressed the frustration of all of us when he said last week:
Hi get as many conflicting reports as anybody else. We have to rely too much on oil companies. I think they tell us what they want to tell."

our federal energy coordinator bill simon has ordered a federal audit of supply information among the oil companies. It is the only way he says to find out the truth about supplies and price increases.
Two weeks ago in the new york times anthony lewis felt the crisis was so critical that he called for a program to put all our motorists on buses and bicycles.
But on the very same page of the same newspaper on the same day christopher rand said there was no crisis at all plenty of energy for everybody. His article was headlined "oil oil everywhere."
as we address the energy priority in this legislative session there are no proven model programs for states to install. But we do know several truths here in minnesota.
We have been incredibly wasteful as individuals and a nation.
With six percent of the world's population we consume more than a third of the world's energy each year'.
There is another truth: Our american love affair with the automobile has starved mass transit . Blinded us while the railroads abandoned this country and crippled intercity bus service.

we are overly dependent on the automobile. In this state there are nearly two automobiles in operation for each family.
Too many drive cars when it's not necessary. Too many students drive short distances to school. Too many people still choose to drive alone.
But even these truths are not the whole story. Our crisis is not due to waste alone.
During november of 1972approximately 177 million gallons of gasoline and 133 million gallons of heating oil were sold in minnesota. One year later in november of 1973 the number of gallons sold was just about the same.
But not the price per gallon. That was up -50 percent for heating oil and 30 percent for gasoline. And those prices are still rising.
Last year 1200 service stations closed their doors. Ladies and gentlemen that's 1200 in minnesota not america. Almost all small independent businessmen.
But not everybody has been suffering. The profits of the major international oil companies for just the third quarter of 1973 alone were up as much . As 91 percent over the year before.

so profits are up and competition is down. I don't believe that was done to help us through the winter.
That is another truth we know.
We also know that some will try to use the energy shortage as an excuse to abandon our effort to provide a cleaner environment for our children.
That is not the answer. And we will not let it happen.
One further truth: Our people have already shown that they are willing to help and sacrifice-if it's really needed and everybody does it together.
These are all facts we rely upon.
And so our goals in minnesota are clear and essential:
It is our job as astate to protect our " people with all the strength we have.
It is our job to keep our people working and our farmers farming.
It is our job to preserve the ability of industry and small business to support a strong minnesota economy.

and it is our job as astate to pay more thoughtful attention to the future to stop waste and maintain the fragile energy balance that supports our prosperity and our quality of life.
We need information. We need to make ourselves heard in washington. We need to develop a state energy policy.
And to achieve those things we have nowhere to turn but to ourselves.
That is why i. Re-emphasize my support today for the creation of a department of energy as provided in legislation authored by representative willard munger and senators alec olson and win borden. I am grateful for the leadership they are providing.
We need a strong visible permanent agency to develop information and recommend policy. We must give it some authority over the growth and conservation of energy supplies in our state. It must draw together . The expert knowledge and efforts of all our great public and private institutions.
I urge the passage of this legislation. We must get on with the job.

we must also respond to the federal legislation requiring speed limits that do not exceed 55 miles per hour on our state highways. And as more federal requirements are seti we have a continuing responsibility to cooperate.
It is also essential to give our school districts the flexibility they need to adjust to energy conservation practices and meet shortages that may develop. And we need to clarify the authority of our state executive council to deal with emergencies.
Finally we must take direct steps to reduce our excessive reliance on the automobile.
We must get people out of automobiles.
But that means getting as many people as possible into community transit systems not only in the twin cities metropolitan area but all across the state.
We cannot accomplish that in a single week. But we cannot accomplish it at all without providing more state support.'
the basic issue is,whether we should use state funds to improve public transportation.

only 54 percent of minnesota's population is concentrated in the 13 communities with mass transit systems. The other 46 percent do not have such transportation available to them.
Now why should senator roger moe from ada or dick fitzsimons from argyle or representative neil haugerud from way down in preston support state funds for transit for city folks?
Their people are not served by community transit. Some would argue that their districts will not benefit.
But it will. I'll tell you why.
Because you want those city drivers to stop using their cars.
If you want to convince a driver in st. Paul or st. Cloud or rochester or moorhead or mankato or duluth to take the bus to work or school or just downtown there must be service that is inexpensive} convenient and comfortable.
That's not the way it is today.

you can't expect people to give up their cars to ride on buses that haven't been built. Along routes that don't exist: Take trains that are no longer in service on roadbeds that are no longer safe.
And so they drive their cars.
Every gallon of gasoline they use in those cars is not available for your tractors farm implements and trucks to plant and cultivate the crops and take the harvest to market.
It is a gallon of gasoline that wasn't saved for a trip to a minnesota resort community.
It is a gallon of gasoline that can't be used to bring merchandise to a small-town minnesota store.
But if we don't use that gasoline in our cars there's a better chance it will be there for farms and factories and businesses.
That is why i urge you to provide $6 million of state funds to improve community transit operations throughout minnesota and explore the possibility of developing them here they do not exist.

this strong commitment to improving community transit operations is a major step we can take in this session to change the way we live in a society where energy conservation is absolutely essential.
Not just for this winter or the next eighteen months. But for the foreseeable future.
In addition i am recommending once again that you give final approval to senator alec olson and representative irv anderson's $200 million highway and transit bonding bill. It not only provides $80 million for community transit: It also provides $120 million to help upgrade unsafe rural highways.
There are no magic buttons for state governments to press. If we do all of these things the energy crisis will not disappear.
But they are a necessary start and now is the time to begin.

the shortage of energy is frustrating and inconvenient and threatening. But it is also an opportunity to improve" the real standards of our living} to strengthen the pattern of our lives.
I know how difficult it may be in the months and years ahead. But in the long run} we will be a stronger state and nation and a better people as a result of facing up to the energy crisis.
We will be less wasteful and more saving.
The quality of our environment will improve.
We have another commitment to keep before this session ends.
Everyone has been saddened and embarrassed by the revelations of arrogance and illegal activity on the national level that have broken over us during the past months.
No other development has been so responsible for undermining our faith.
Everyone in this chamber--from whatever political persuasion--has been cheated by these events.

everyone here knows that we cannot cast aside their implications.
To the people of this state who are listening to us today i want to emphasize this point.
We have all read a great deal about this national tragedy. But i have been in politics and government for more than sixteen years.
And i know the minnesota republican party is not like that. The minnesota democratic-farmer-labor is not like that.
The men and women who participate in politics in political parties and in government in minnesota are not like that.
Minnesota is not like that. Not in the past not in the present and god willing never in the future.
But we have been flirting with disaster for years in minnesota as well as the nation.
For as i said here a year ago) the way we are forced to finance our election campaigns is a deadly cancer infecting our free election system.

this state of ours has produced more than its share of presidential candidates and national leaders in public life.
We are the nation's model in so many ways.
Now we must exert national leadership in reforming the election process as well.
That means realistic limits on campaign spending.
It means mandatory disclosure of contributions.
It means moving toward broad based public support through the $1.00 check off system.
It means a tough and impartial ethics commission to give the most careful attention to the supervision of elections and the political activities of elected office holders.
The legislation being carried by senators north and keefe and representative tom berg is before you.
No one claims it is perfect or that it should be exempt from reasonable debate.

but we do know that the major thrust of this legislation is both essential and overdue.
Its defeat would be intolerable.
The people of minnesota will not accept excuses. And they should not. There is too much at stake.
We must give our attention to other important legislation as well.
I have a prejudice.
I believe that pride in home ownership is one of the great strengths of our society. Home ownership supports the quality neighborhoods our children deserve.
Nearly 72 percent of our minnesota homes are owned by those who live in them.
People who own their homes have a stake in their neighborhoods and they know it.
Yet this cornerstone of our quality of life is being threatened. Ordinary citizens find it difficult and often impossible today to buy new homes or even improve the homes in which they are living. Federal assistance does not begin to meet this problem.

that is why two months ago senate majority leader coleman and house speaker sabo joined me in proposing anew housing rehabilitation program.
A large portion of our minnesota residences are in need of repair. The program we are urging you to pass will provide $100 million in revenue bonds for small housing improvement loans at low interest rates.
There is another important matter on which time is running out.
It was widely predicted last january that this would be the session in which no-fault insurance became law in minnesota. There is still time to do so.
And i very strongly urge you to make this prediction come true. We need no-fault insurance--we need a reduction in the premiums our people pay.
Another area that requires action this
year is metropolitan planning and development.
Let me express my gratitude for the great time and effort that has been given to questions of metropolitan government by this legislature since i noted a year ago that such attention was long overdue.

i am well aware that there are important legitimate differences on questions of substance---on metropolitan issues that still divide the senate and house committees.
Answers to such basic questions should not come easily. But they should come soon--and in the spirit of compromise that marks the governmental process.
Many of our metropolitan concerns require immediate attention.
We must find a way to help communities develop additional parks and open spaces before the spaces and the opportunity disappear.
And the energy crisis demands that this legislature commit itself to the preparation of a comprehensive metro transit plan to be reviewed and approved when you meet again in 1975.
In the end, effective action on these metropolitan questions will help to reassure our citizens that state government can respond to the common needs.

we should also establish an independent board for the selection of design architects and engineers for state projects as senator coleman and representative irv anderson are proposing.
We should insure the protection of parochial school tax credits that have already been granted and explore alternative ways of keeping a strong dual system of public and private education in our state.
Under the new federal income plan for the aged blind and disabled we should supplement payments for all who meet our previous state standards of eligibility
we need some immediate capacity plan the future shape of our human services system in minnesota.
We should consider a state program of low interest loans for community health and mental health facilities including group homes.
We should make certain that needy people do not suffer financial losses under the general assistance reforms provided in 1973.

we should consider state regulation of our minnesota utilities.
The list could be still longer. I know that you will give attention to many of these items and others on your own agendas.
But i ask you to concentrate on the priorities:
To act with deliberate speed and minimum partisanship.
I feel privileged to have worked with a legislature that dared so much and has already achieved so much.
It is tempting to list your record--the senior citizen tax freeze, help for the handicapped, environmental protection, the veterans bonus, significant consumer legislation, the minimum wage and public employee bargaining laws, restrictions on corporate farming, more openness in the conduct of government at all levels, maintenance of fair school finance and property tax relief.
Our business today is what you still must dol not what you have done.

our people appreciate the effort you have made.
For minnesotans are aware of what kind of state and what kind of people we are.
The real strength of our state springs from the talent1 energy and humane commitment of our people.
I am optimistic about our future.
Our people are resilient and responsive and realistic.
They can live with the truth.
They do not accept easy rhetoric and impossible promises. But they do recognize and support performance.
They have heard the warnings of these troubled days.
And so must we.

