Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, Mr. Chief Justice, members of the court, constitutional officers, members of the Legislature and my fellow Minnesotans.
Two years ago I began this address by stating that the central goal of this administration would be job creation and economic recovery, achieved through a partnership between the public and private sectors.
I am pleased to report to you that we have made giant strides toward this goal. The state of the state is greatly improved and getting better.
Two years ago Minnesota's unemployment rate stood at an all-time high.
216,000 of our people were out of work.
The Legislature had staggered through six special sessions, raising taxes, shifting spending and cutting services.
Minnesota's valued triple-A credit rating had been lost, and another deficit was looming on the horizon.
Our state faced the most severe financial crisis in its history.
 
In contrast today...

***

There are more than 170,000 additional Minnesotans employed.

In fact, there are 57,800 more people working now than ever before in the history of our state. For the year ending in October, Minnesota ranked second nationally in total employment gains.

Our state's bank account is in the black instead of the
red . . .

We are re-gaining our top credit ratings

We have a surplus in place of a deficit

And this month we shall payoff our last outstanding loan.

The turn-around has been one of the most dramatic and impressive in the nation.

***
In the past two years, we joined together a family unified by stress and we found our way.

 
We've helped each other we've reached out with

compassion to those in need

and we've restored

confidence and pride in our great state.

To each of you who helped during these difficult days thank you from the bottom of my heart.

I am grateful for your assistance, I am proud of your effort, and I am honored to be your Governor.

Special thanks go to you, the members of the legislature, for helping us make the difficult but necessary decisions.

New leaders have been chosen for this session of the Legislature, and I look forward to working with you.

For the first time in our state's history, a woman

Connie Levi

is the majority leader of the House of

Representatives in Minnesota. I congratulate you, Connie,

and I wish you well.

***
Now we turn our attention to the future, determined to build Minnesota to a position of strength in 1985 and the years ahead.

 
The challenge for the 1980s and 90s is to achieve vigorous, sustainable economic growth in rapidly changing times.
And I'm convinced that the state which will lead the nation is the one that best develops and harnesses the talents, energies and ingenuity of its people.
Minnesota has a natural advantage with well-educated, productive people. We must capitalize on our strengths.
The key to Minnesota's success lies in our ability to adapt this state to a nation and world of profound change. We must embrace change, and shape it, to meet tomorrow on our terms.
If we prepare for change. Minnesota will do well. Minnesota will do well because knowledge will be the steel of this post-industrial economy. Minnesota has the potential to become the number one brainpower state in the nation.
And believe me, we will be the brainpower state in the nation.
 
The path to permanent prosperity in Minnesota will require bold leadership and courageous legislative action to make our state more productive and competitive.

We must move decisively on four major fronts.

First we must reduce personal income taxes and simplify our tax forms.

Second we must control spending and guarantee fiscal stability.

Third we must strengthen our educational system.

Fourth we must accelerate our efforts in economic development and international trade.

All of these actions are aimed at one main strategy;

To create jobs quality jobs Minnesotans, now and in the future.

for all

***
Our first priority our first action must be a major reduction in personal income taxes.

 
My plan will save Minnesotans 604 million dollars, and will drop our maximum tax rate from sixteen percent to nine-point-nine percent.
For a family of four with one wage earner making 15,000 dollars a year Minnesota now ranks number one among all 50 states.
This tax cut will drop us to number 18 in that category. That makes me very happy I'm sure it does you too.
And for the first time in many years, Minnesota will no longer rank number one in any personal income tax category.
Were it not for the severe economic hardship in parts of Minnesota, we could make significantly larger tax reductions. However, we will not turn our backs on the thousands of Minnesotans who desperately need our help.
***
Along with this major tax cut, we must drastically simplify our tax forms.
I don't have to remind you what a hassle it is each year to fill out this tax form.
 
It's three pages long contains 32 pages of instructions and requires you to fill in over 100 spaces. It's a taxpayer's nightmare to say the least.
Under our plan you will have a simple one-page form.
It will haver only 16 lines, and it should take most of us less than 15 minutes to complete the form.
Minnesotans want, need and deserve tax reduction and simplification.
So I am appealing to the legislature to to make this tax reduction retroactive to January first of this year.
***
Our second major priority is spending control and fiscal stability. Stability means a strong state savings account, a budget reserve, a rainy day fund.
It goes by many names, but it means one thing -- an insurance policy against bad times, a guarantee that Minnesota will never again go through the financial chaos of a few years ago.
 
The reserve should be increased to 500 million dollars. I have a surprise for you. We have the money in the bank already. Just don't spend it.
An adequate reserve means we can pay our bills, make payments to local governments on time, and regain our triple-A credit rating.
Having a budgeted reserve is good, sound business practice and I am determined to get it enacted.
****
A strong budget reserve must be coupled with controls on state spending. Our budget team, under the direction of Finance Commissioner Donhowe, has spent nearly six months analyzing every conceivable way to cut the growth of government spending.
Thanks to their work, the budget which I will submit holds average spending increases to less than six percent a year, the smallest percentage increase in state spending in 20 years.
I can assure you that this budget contains only the most essential elements to provide quality services to our people.
 
I am determined to give Minnesota a national reputation for excellent fiscal management. My department heads will be judged by their ability to reduce spending and streamline state government. Our over-riding objective shall be to deliver quality services to the people of Minnesota as efficiently as possible.

We have proven that government can be lean without being mean.

It is my hope that by the time I leave the Office of

Governor, our state will be run with such efficiency

and such foresight

 that stockholders throughout the

United States will ask "Why can't business be run like

government in Minnesota."

On this issue, the federal government should take lessons from Minnesota.

Had Washington operated like Minnesota for the past two years, the federal government might be operating in the black instead of the red.

Unfortunately Washington doesn't have the discipline or ability to control spending.

 
The federal deficit is retarding the economic vitality of this country, and it must be brought under control.
I am announcing my support of a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced federal budget.
This is a dramatic step, but it must be taken.
Minnesota and other states are required to balance their budgets and I ask you, why not the federal government?
****
Positioning Minnesota for a dynamic future also requires investment. Investment to stimulate growth and create jobs investment in economic development and international trade.
There's a line from the broadway play liThe Music Man" about a traveling salesman. "You've got to know the territory."
Our territory in 1985 and beyond will be the world -- not just Minnesota, not just the Midwest, not just America -- but the world.
If you are a teacher you will be teaching more about other countries.
 
If you are a business person you will be learning more about exporting.

If you are a worker you will be looking at how your counterpart in another country does the job.

If you are a parent you will see your children

traveling more, 

learning more languages and

working in different parts of the world.

You will see that your children have opportunities which you and your parents never dreamed were possible.

Our state government must move forward with the rest of the world.

We must know the territory.

Where would the Japanese be today if they had stayed home?

Or more importantly, where would our steel industry be today if American steel executives -- rather than remaining complacent -- had decided to get to know the territory and make the world their marketplace?

We, not the Japanese, should be controlling the world steel markets.

 
Japan is not rich in natural resources. It imports

99 percent of its iron ore. 80 percent of its coal

 99 percent of its oil

 60 percent of its timber

and about one third of its food.

Yet, each year it records trade surpluses in the billions of dollars.

Japan is a world leader in consumer electronics, watches, motorcycles, cameras, automobiles and steel production.

Japan has succeeded because it strived in every way to become competitive. It developed and utilized technology. and then it headed around the world to sell its products and make investments.

We in Minnesota are following Japan's example. opening a bigger market for Minnesota's products, services and technologies.

It makes sense for us to do this because, Foreign trade is the wave of the future, and Minnesota must be ahead of the rest of the country. We must prepare now for the time when the value of the dollar is more realistic, and American products will once again be competitive in world markets.

 
International trade means expanded business for Minnesota, and business expansion, of course, means more jobs for Minnesota workers.
I will travel and continue to travel to any community in this state, any city in this nation, any corner of the world to bring jobs to Minnesota.
We must remember that Minnesota works best when its people are at work.
****
Jobs for tomorrow depend upon education and training today, which is our other major priority to position Minnesota for the future.
Education is the fuel that drives the engine of economic growth and job creation in America's modern society.
Minnesota has a head start here thanks to the long-standing support of public and private education by our people.
Our education system at all levels is one of the best in the country. But we must and we shall .. do better.
 
Last week I announced a bold, new plan for elementary and secondary education. A plan for access to excellence. This is a plan which ensures that all Minnesotans can participate in determining the highest quality of education for our young people.
Access to excellence will clarify the role of the state strengthen local control increase the
productivity of our students and allow parents and students to make decisions about the quality of education.
This is a plan which allows our young people to realize their full potential and to enjoy the brightest future possible.
In less than three weeks, I will submit a budget which significantly increases support to our post-secondary schools. About one-fifth of our budget will be invested in post-secondary education.
We need a strong vocational-technical system to support the workforce needs of our businesses.
We need a strong community college system to provide life-long learning opportunities for all citizens.
 
We need a strong state university system to educate our young people and to serve the economic development of our regions.
And we need a university which is strong, and world renowned for its graduate programs and research. We have a choice. We can be mediocre or we can be the best. I am sure that we in Minnesota want the best.
I want all Minnesotans to have access to the highest-quality education.
Education for me and many of my generation was a passport out of poverty.
Education for my children and yours will be a passport to prosperity.
Minnesota will become known throughout America and the world as the brainpower state.
Our brainpower will fuel the information-based and technology-based industries already flourishing in our state. It will give rise to new enterprises new ideas and new technologies which can be marketed around the world.

****
These major legislative actions will sustain our momentum and position Minnesota for a strong future.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. President . I view this 1985 session not only as the midpoint of the 1980s, but literally as the turning point for our state.
***
While I am pleased by the progress we have made and while I see many signs for optimism . . I am greatly disturbed by what I see happening in much of rural Minnesota.
It is increasingly apparent that Minnesota is becoming a two-economy state, with prosperity in the metropolitan area and depression in many rural parts of Minnesota.
Although there are now 57,800 more Minnesotans working than ever before in our state's history . . that is no consolation to the steel workers on the Iron Range, to the wood workers in International Falls, to the implement dealers in Dawson or the farmers in Fairmont.
The farm crisis and the severe problems of structural unemployment will require a massive, bipartisan effort that
 
includes a major commitment from Washington. The problem goes far beyond our control. The state can help and we will . . but our Senators and Congressmen must work with us. As a nation pulls together in time of crisis, our state must pUll together in this time of economic disaster in rural Minnesota.
I want to work with all of you in developing permanent, long-term solutions for our economically depressed areas.
To those people .hard-working people whose lives are being devastated .to all who may feel this despair
 let me say that I know from personal experience the heartache you are going through.
I can remember my days growing up in Carson Lake a small mining town on the Iron Range. When my father's lunch box was on the shelf, it meant no work, no income for our family.
I know what it's like to need a job and not have one. I know what it's like to face the loss of home and community, since my hometown of Carson Lake is gone forever.
I want you to know that I will not rest in my efforts until all Minnesotans share in our improving economy.
 
I want you to know, also, that I am committed to making

Minnesota benefit, not suffer, 

from the changes

that are sweeping America and the world.

Resisting change is a losing battle. Shaping change is the real challenge. And accepting change can mean new opportunities.

Many times in my own life I have learned this lesson.

When I was five years old . . . a first generation

American who couldn't speak English,

dedicated

teachers taught me the English language and opened a window

on the world.

Many years later, I suffered the deep personal disappointment that follows a political defeat.

You could not have convinced me that any good could come

from that. But,

in fact, it was a bright, new

beginning.

Again, the world opened up. I learned much more about business, international trade, the arts, the cultures of other people. And I developed a closer bond with my own family.

 
I returned to the Office of the Governor with a new perspective a broader view a clearer vision of what Minnesota can be.

And I entered the job with a new enthusiasm for the state and the people I love.

It's an enthusiasm I believe that flows from a special Minnesota spirit.

A spirit that we saw this holiday season when empty food shelves were filled to overflowing once the call for help went out.

It's a spirit that captures the attention of national observers such as Neil Peirce who, in his Book Of America: Inside The 50 States, he said:

"Search America from sea to sea and you will not find as close a model to the ideal of the successful society as Minnesota."

As we look ahead to the 21st century, just 15

years away

 it occurs to me that we are all immigrants

sailing to a new land.

The technological language and culture of tomorrow are unknown to us today. But I am hopeful as I was when I


first began to learn English as a second language that our voyage into the future will be successful.

By nurturing our sense of family by continuing

our spirit of cooperation by adopting common goals 

by preparing for change

 we can reach our goal.

We can make Minnesota productive and competitive . . and meet the future on our own terms.

Thank you very much.
