Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, Mr. Chief Justice, Members of the Court, Constitutional Officers, Members of the Legislature, former governors and my fellow Minnesotans.
I can report tonight that the state of our state is sound.
We have overcome major adversities, we are meeting remaining problems boldly, and we are placing Minnesota squarely on course for a stable and prosperous future.
Minnesota is a remarkable state. Minnesotans are exceptional people. And I am deeply grateful and honored for the opportunity to serve longer than any other governor in the history of this state.
The hurdles ahead are great. But the opportunities are even greater. And the special Minnesota spirit is poised for the challenges we face together.
Our objective in the next four years is to bring out the best in Minnesotans to ensure opportunity for our children.
The five-year-olds who enter kindergarten next fall will graduate from high school in the year 2000. We must be sure that all of them have quality job opportunities.
Our goal is to make Minnesota a model state, to make Minnesota the brainpower state, to make Minnesota a world renowned research center.
To meet these objectives, we must focus our efforts in three key areas.
We must have a tax system that is competitive, honest, fair and simple, an education system that is committed to excellence, and a climate of research that will yield the products, ideas and jobs of the future.
Our future extends beyond terms of public office.
We must use our terms of office to shape our vision for the Minnesota of the 21st century.
It was 24 years ago this week that I first took the oath of office as a state senator and began my service to the state of Minnesota. Only one other individual who was here then, still serves today -- Representative Willard Munger -- Mr. Environment.
Representative Munger and I know how long the debate on Minnesota's business climate has raged.

For more than a quarter of a century, we have heard that Minnesota taxes are too high, and that the Minnesota business climate is bad.
I remember well three years ago when I met with a group of Norwegian business executives in Oslo who spoke at some length in negative terms about our business climate, and the perception of Minnesota as a high-tax state has hampered our ability to attract and create more much-needed jobs.
When I took office as governor in 1983, Minnesotans paid more income taxes than citizens of almost every other state.
We took dramatic action over the past four years, including a 25 percent cut in our income taxes, the largest cut of any state in the union.
But more must be done. We must harness the momentum of federal tax reform to initiate a major overhaul of our entire tax system.
This year we will propose the most sweeping reform in the history of this state.
Our tax plan will be the fairest and most thoughtful of any state in the nation this year.
First we will respond to the new federal law by returning the entire state windfall to the taxpayers of Minnesota.
In addition, 125,000 Minnesota low income families will no lo~ger have any state tax liability.
We will also streamline our tax forms.
Our short form will have only five lines. In fact, most people can do it in less than five minutes.
And our long form will be a single page.
Two-thirds of all taxpayers will be able to use the short form.
We will achieve a dramatic reduction in income tax rates.
When I took office in 1983, our top rate on the income tax was nearly 18 percent.
Under our new plan, we will cut that top rate by more than one-half to 8 percent, and we will also have a 6 percent rate for lower incomes.
Our personal income tax will be the fairest and most thoughtful of any state in the nation.

We will apply the same philosophy to our corporate tax.
I am particularly excited about our plan for property taxes and local government aids.
We will greatly simplify our system, which is now the most complicated in the nation.
We will reduce the number of property tax classifications from 68 to 6.
A key element of our program will be to increase the share of state funding for education, which is the cornerstone of our plan for the future.
I propose that the state assume a substantial share of school costs which are now paid for by property taxes.
Our property tax plan, like our income tax plan, will be the fairest and most thoughtful in the nation.
We will apply the same principles of fairness and thoughtfulness to sales tax reform, without taxing food, clothing, services or prescription drugs.
Overall our tax program has several themes: rate reduction, simplification, and fairness.
No longer will Minnesota tax rates be in the top ten in any major tax categories.
I want to repeat that no longer will Minnesota tax rates be in the top ten in any major tax categories.
We will create a better environment for job growth. And from this day forward we will focus all of our energy and ideas on making life better for those who need help most: our beleaguered farmers, our dislocated miners, and the jobless in our cities.
It is a long-standing and unique Minnesota tradition to form partnerships for the benefit of all.
Most recently we saw this Minnesota spirit in a group of people who reached a remarkable consensus on reform of our schools.
The Governor's Discussion Group brought together people with diverse points of view, but a common goal of making ed~cation in Minnesota the best.
This group understood the importance of making Minnesota the brainpower state, and that brainpower is the wellspring of future economic growth.

We will draw from the group's recommendations to make our K-12 education system the best in this nation.
In higher education, we will continue progress toward making' the University of Minnesota a world-class university, one of the top five universities in the nation.
In January 1985, we asked university officials to focus their mission, and they answered with an excellent plan.
The state, in turn, responded with increased funds for faculty salaries, research and financial aid for students.
It is critical that we continue to support the University's efforts as we did in 1985.
The state university system also has moved to clarify its role, and will become the major provider of undergraduate education.
Our state universities will increasingly become regional economic development centers in greater Minnesota, serving as catalysts for long-term economic growth and vitality.
Our community colleges and our AVTI system have more clearly defined their strengths through recent mission statements.
Graduating from a Minnesota AVTI has proven to be a sure-fire way to a job.
In the future, our AVTIs will play an increasingly important role in creating a better future for the working poor, for victims of major economic declines, and for many Minnesotans who seek training and retraining to provide for their families in the years to corne.
The AVTIs in Minnesota are the best in the nation. I am very very proud of them, and I wish each and everyone of you would applaud that system.
Excellent education will pave the way out of adversity for the most dependent Minnesotans.
This will represent real welfare reform.
I am asking the 1987 Legislature to join with me in establishing a goal that I believe is vital to our future as a state.
By the year 2000, I propose that 50 percent of the workforce in Minnesota will have an education two years beyond high school, and that 35 percent will have completed at least four years of college.

Minnesota already has the best high school completion rate of any state, and I propose we set the same goal for higher education.
Our third key area of emphasis must be research, research which will provide the tools of the future and the jobs of tomorrow.
Research and development leading to job creation will offer the best hope for areas of our. state which have been devastated by the changing economics of a nation and world.
The centerpiece of our research and development enterprise will be the Greater Minnesota Corporation, a public private organization that will spearhead the long-term economic recovery of rural Minnesota.
The Greater Minnesota Corporation will work hand-in-hand with colleges and universities throughout the state to translate research into business development and job creation.
Research will be the catalyst for economic diversification in the future as it has been in the past.
Taconite mining research conducted by Dr. Edward Davis over three decades at the University of Minnesota paved the way in the 1950s for a whole new industry for the Iron Range.
In the early 1900s, experiments in manufacturing sandpaper were conducted by a small company in Two Harbors, Minnesota.
This was the beginning of 3M, today a multinational corporation which makes more than forty thousand products and is our state's largest industrial employer.
3M's unrelenting commitment to research has spawned job opportunities throughout Minnesota and throughout the world.
Many new jobs have resulted from major medical advancements that occurred here in Minnesota.
Medtronic and its pacemaker -- which has provided a new lease on life for people throughout the world -- took shape in Earl Bakken's garage about forty years ago.
Advanced surgical techniques and devices to aid the hearing impaired are other examples of research-driven developments that have improved human life and have created new jobs.
Today, state government is in partnership with the University of Minnesota and private business interests to encourage more breakthroughs that will result in new jobs.
Together, we have established the Technology Corridor, the Supercomputer Institute and of course, the biotechnology center.
We have also invested in applied research efforts at Southwest State University to improve the economy of that region.

With all of our accomplishments in research and development, Minnesota must continue to invest in these activities or we will fall behind.
In the year 2000 Minnesotans will live in an economy rich with new ideas, new products and new jobs.
Minnesota will become a world-renowned research center.
Minnesotans have the abilities to meet these goals.
It has been proven time and again that prosperity does not depend on geographic size, location or climate. Nor does it rely on an abundance of energy fuels or other natural resources.
The key is people, our most important resource.
On opposite sides of the world, we have examples of two small nations, Finland and Japan, where people have made a difference.
Finland is similar to Minnesota in climate, its lack of energy resources and its distance from major economic hubs.
Yet this small nation has the 11th best per capita income in the world. It hasn't had a major economic recession since the end of World War II.
Japan is smaller in geographic size than four of our states, has half of the population of the United States, and virtually no petroleum, iron ore, coal or other mineral resources.
Nevertheless, Japan each year has trade surpluses in the billions of dollars, while the exports of much larger nations lag behind.
Minnesota is the only northern state from Pennsylvania to the west coast that experienced economic growth in the past four years.
Japan, Finland, and Minnesota all are places where industrious people made the difference.
So in closing tonight, I want to cite one illustration of the immense human resources of our state.
During the recent around-the-world flight of the Voyager, there were numerous references made to an earlier aviation feat.
Sixty years ago this May, Charles Lindbergh--whose character was forged in a small Minnesota town---stretched the horizons of human achievement in space, when his plane touched down in Paris after a 33-hour flight across the Atlantic.
Charles Lindbergh exemplified the loneliness of leadership, the daring of discovery, and best of the human
it.

He called his plane "The Spirit of St. Louis," but his heart beat with the spirit of Minnesota.
Minnesotans have led journeys of discovery, journeys of learning, and journeys of love.
Minnesotans have proven to be thinkers, leaders, creators and doers.
Let us continue to think, to lead, to create, and to do.
Along with you, I love this state, and I love its people.
Tonight we stand, side by side, as a family on the threshold of the 21st century. We are challenged by those who have blazed the trail before us. This is the pioneering leadership which is the best of Minnesota.
Tonight, I have spoken of three priorities which will move Minnesota forward -- tax reform, education, and a major investment in research.
We must forge our own future.
Minnesota, the model state, Minnesota, the brainpower state, Minnesota, the world-renowned research center.
Minnesota will be-ready for the challenge of the 21st century.
We are limited only by our skills, our determination, and our imagination.
Thank you and good night.