Mr. Speaker, mr. President, mr. Chief justice, members of the court, constitutional officers, members of the legislature, former governors, people of Minnesota. Eleven weeks ago i asked Minnesotans to tell me how drugs affected their lives.
And here is what they said.

Drugs destroy lives. Drugs have no place in Minnesota. No place in our schools no place in our neighborhoods. No place in our families. Drugs have overwhelmed other states but not Minnesota. Minnesota leads the nation because Minnesota met the drug problem head-on. Over half a century beginning at willmar state hospital and then at hazelden Minnesota developed a program for treating addiction. Known as the Minnesota model the program saves lives all over the world. Most states would be satisfied having given the world a treatment program but Minnesota has done more. Minnesota always does more. In Minnesota we build on our success. Since 1983 we have more than doubled funding for alcohol and drug prevention programs in our schools. In 1983 we created the criminal justice task force. In 1985 we created the chemical dependency treatment fund. Minnesota was the first state to provide drug treatment on demand. In 1986 Minnesota's plan for using federal anti-drug money was recognized as a model for the nation. In 1987 we created the high school graduation incentives program which gives students with drug problems a chance to start over.

In 1989 ... Based in part ... On the work of the criminal justice task force we passed tougher criminal penalties for people who possess or sell drugs.
In 1989 ... We also enacted the "year of the city." we are rebuilding neighborhoods ... Training the unemployed ... And providing mental health care and child care.
Drugs will not disappear unless our communities are healthy. Our drug policy is comprehensive ... We treat both the individual and the community.
We in Minnesota government always do more than expected ... Because the people of Minnesota always do more than expected.
During the last six weeks ... I have met with people dedicated to chasing drugs and crime from their neighborhoods.
In minneapolis.. I visited with members of the whittier neighborhood who are forcing landlords to evict tenants who run crack houses.

In st. Paul ... I met with nick davis ... One of the heroes of the drug war. Nick and his neighbors are chasing drug dealers out of their neighborhood. Minnesotans know that apathy is the drug dealer's greatest ally. Minnesotans are willing to organize their communities against drugs ... But they need guidance and they need funding. The state will supply both. As governor ... I am determined to multiply neighborhood drug programs. With every Minnesota neighborhood organized against drugs ... We will have a strike force four million people strong. Four million people fighting the spread of drugs. Four million people helping those addicted to drugs. Minnesota ... I am proud to say ... Provides treatment on demand. Most areas of the country have long waiting lists. With drugs ... Delay means death. Waiting lists in Minnesota will never be acceptable. We must increase funding for our chemical dependency treatment fund. We must also continue to develop specialized treatment programs.

Last week i visited the four winds program in brainerd ... A treatment program developed specifically for native americans. The program combines native american history and culture with a modern treatment program.
The four winds program works. Specialized treatment programs work.
I am also asking for resources to develop aftercare programs. We must help people as they adjust to drug-free lives.
Drug-free lives for all Minnesotans ... That is my goal. A goal we will not reach until we decide that drug use is unacceptable. As unacceptable as slavery ... As unacceptable as torture.
Drug addiction is a form of slavery ... It is a form of torture.
Until Minnesotans harden their minds against drug use ... We will need a strong criminal justice system to shield us from the violence of drugs.
To improve law enforcement ... I recommend we hire more agents for the bureau of criminal apprehension ... Expand training of local police ... And provide funds to local law enforcement task forces.
And to help courts respond quickly i recommend 12 new judges.

In addition ... I ask the legislature to expand sentencing alternatives and supervised probation so nonviolent criminals can be dealt with more effectively. I also ask the legislature to expand the drug treatment programs in prisons. No one should ever leave prison with a craving for drugs. The theme of my speech is "building on success." in the fight against drugs ... Minnesota schools are our greatest success. Those who despair about the drug crisis should look here at jefferson high school.. And down the street at olson junior high. Both schools have nationally recognized drug prevention programs. Currently every school in the state is required by law to have a drug prevention program. I am determined that every school in Minnesota will have a drug program as good as the one here at jefferson. Let's give jefferson high school a big hand for doing such a great job. We have already more than doubled funding for school drug programs. I will ask the legislature to fund more career teachers and non-profit providers so students receive individualized attention.

And finally.. I will be proposing an increase in funding to schools so that the dare program and project charlie are available to more schools. Project charlie was created in edina 13 years ago. On a visit to woodland elementary in eagan ... I was impressed by the way project charlie got the message about drugs to children. We must bring the dare program and project charlie to more schools in Minnesota. And to reach children early ... We must involve parents. The early childhood family education program ... Strengthens families by teaching parents to help their children. Children with supportive parents are better prepared for school and have greater self-confidence. We must expand this program up to the third grade. I am also seeking an increase in funding for head start so we can serve more children ... Especially homeless children . . Head start graduates do better in school ... They do better at home ..And they do better in life. Yet only 30 percent of eligible children participate in the program.

No matter how good our teachers are ... And our teachers are the best ... There is one group of children no school alone can help. The children of addicts.
Children born addicted to drugs. Children beaten, abused and neglected.
I will propose legislation to help these children. But we can't legislate a perfect world. I need your help. We must unite to protect the children. We must unite to protect ourselves. And we must unite four million strong. To drive drugs from Minnesota.
I have asked students from bloomington to join me in a . Pledge against drugs. The pledge is in your program.
So will you please stand and join us ... A small segment of Minnesota ... As we recite this pledge:

I pledge never to use drugs to help those addicted to drugs and to fight the spread of drugs until we are the first state in the nation drug free.
I want to thank each and every one of you for pledging your support to make Minnesota drug free. Thank you very much.