I come to the House chamber with great respect to deliver the 1999 State of the State Address for the State of Minnesota 120 days after our general election. In an era marked by professional political machinery that surrounds both candidates and elected officials, I began in a unique position. I went to the transition office in the basement of the Capitol alone the day after the election.

I brought my convictions, born of life experience, the freedom of having made no promises on the campaign trail that I couldn't keep. I brought my commitment to learn and become an excellent governor. I brought a belief in my ability to build and lead the best executive branch of government this state has ever seen ... the most honest, the most service-minded, the most accountable, the most committed to results for the people of Minnesota.

I also brought to the job three fundamental beliefs that are very, very important to understanding how I will govern:

First, said best by Abraham Lincoln - the role for government is to do only what the people cannot do for themselves. There is not a person in Minnesota who does not wish to individually pursue the Constitutional entitlements to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Government should promote this type of self-sufficiency, not stand in the way. There is, after all, a place for common sense and restraint. We can't legislate against every stupid thing people will do, and yet the temptation is there to try time and time again. Every time government burdens the people with nonsense like rules that dictate how to butter bread in nursing homes — and believe it or not, that is a real government regulation — we remove any incentive for doing good work.

Second, I believe in personal responsibility and self-sufficiency.

The State of the State is jeopardized by this weak notion that taxpayers must step forward to provide nearly unlimited resources to anyone who faces adversity... who lives with circumstances they brought about through their own decisions... or who lives with consequences of choices to act illegally.

I stand before you as Governor willing to say what too many politicians at all levels of government have been scared to say: the free ride is over.

The election debate was littered with promises of tax cuts, but how in the world
can we accomplish that if we don't reform an expectation for "entitlements?"
You can't convince me that people value something that they get for free more
than something that they earn. It is hard to say "NO," but we elected leaders
must learn how if we intend to accomplish greater things for Minnesota. Public
funds spent on investments, like education, rather than direct entitlements will
benefit everyone now and in the future.
And finally, I believe that greatness in this state can only continue with an
active, involved citizenry.
If you wonder where I am getting my support for this candid approach to
governing, let me introduce you to some of the people who told me it was time for
this new day in state government. Up in the gallery are two very important
groups of advisors who gave this advice during the transition when we spent the
first month listening and learning.
Thanks are owed to the young people who came in during the second week of
the transition and talked about their hopes for this new day. Thanks are also
owed to the group of first time voters, randomly selected from the Secretary of
State's voter registration lists, who spoke about what it will take to KEEP them
involved. Legislature, please join me in welcoming these Minnesotans here
today.
"People -- this is your House of Representatives and Senate convened together
for this address. We are YOUR elected officials ... 201 of them and one of me ...
we are your public servants. It is my intention that during these years you will be
welcome here — more welcome than I was when I visited this chamber floor as a
citizen last year -- and was asked three times to sit down in a chair where I could
not see anything. Let me tell you, it is good to have you here today -- and it's
good to be standing."
To the first time voters and to the young people, I say again what I have said
before: We dare not lose you,. To the legislature, I utter this challenge -- make this Capitol a welcoming place. Inspire the citizens in your home districts. Help
your local elected officials run good, open meetings that are responsive to citizen
input. Do the right things. Vote your conscience, not your caucus.
The State of the State is that the people are very tired of business as
usual.
One way or another, there will be more than 70 percent voting at the polls in the
next election and the one after that. The people will either come out to keep their
governor, their legislators, their congressmen, their mayors, county
commissioners, and school board members -- or oust us. But they are awake,
and Minnesota will be greater for them exercising the right to vote. Generations
of Minnesotans have fought to protect that right on American soil and around the
world.
I want to see an active PTA in every school building, not just the 270 that are left
today.
o Chambers of Commerce where the room is full of PRIVATE sector
business people who are not outnumbered by public employees,
o Youth groups like 4-H and Scouts and after school clubs full of
interested kids and their parents who want to make a difference for
themselves and others.
o Active veterans groups serving those who have served.
o And a renewed interest in volunteering for service clubs, local
chapters of state organizations, and neighborhood efforts.
The State of the State improves every time a citizen, young or old, gets
involved.
This is the State of the State as I see it at the end of the Transition months.
Regarding the State of the Minnesota government, I am well qualified to give
this Address today • in fact, I will venture that I am more in touch with state
government than any Governor in recent times at this point in my term. I set foot
in every department and major agency, met with the staff, met many employees
who do the real work of serving the people, and laid hands on their budgets
personally. I met employees who had worked 30 years for the State and never
met a Governor. It should not be a "shock the world" event when the Governor
visits the State Department of Revenue.
Ladies and gentlemen, the first job of the Governor is to run the Executive
Branch of government. We are working very hard to span a tragic disconnect
between the Capitol building and the 35,000 state employees who perform the
functions that are authorized and appropriated by previous legislatures.

How many of you here were newly elected this year? PLEASE RAISE YOUR
HANDS. Fully 15 percent of the house are newly elected. Like you, I had eight
short weeks to get ready for consideration of a $33 BILLION expenditure of the
people's money. How many of you -- all of you, not just the newly elected
legislators -- have taken time in the last year to personally visit every department
who's budget you will vote on? It took me one month to see all of this huge state
government.
We must reform how we do business. We must reform the tendency to vote first
and learn later. Or, worse yet, never take the time to learn and simply fall in line
behind a caucus position for bargaining purposes.
The Constitutional Separation between the Executive and Legislative Branches
of Government is not intended to be one born of partisan, adversarial politics.
We each have a very distinct job to do in a healthy process of checks and
balances.
Within one week of my election, I set three top priorities: budget, budget,
budget. There was no other choice; the system requires that the budget books
be submitted by mid-February. I led that process. I don't care what the media
decided to focus your attention on -- that's what I was doing. It started with
budget principles that are clear and written down for everyone to see. Today I
am releasing mine to you in a handy wallet form, and putting them on the web
site for public use.
They boil down to this:
Be fiscally prudent -- never, ever forget it's the public's money
• Do what's necessary ... not what's nice to do.
• Prevent future costs where possible.
• Insist that projected budgets are balanced for four years
• Set a responsible budget, live within it, and settle-up any actual surpluses
with taxpayers at the end of the biennium. (On this point, let me just
acknowledge the incredibly large elephant standing with us in this room.
As soon as you're ready to send me a sales tax rebate bill, I'm ready to
sign it and get on to permanent income tax cut discussions.)
Do the right things and do them well
• We must start evaluating programs for results.
• We can't ever hesitate to reform or eliminate programs if they aren't
producing results.
• Every new program should automatically have a "sunset" clause that
forces proper evaluation.

And finally, we must create incentives, not penalties, for individuals and
governments to do the right things.
• Competition works and is even good in government.
• We need to put responsibility and accountability together at all levels of
government.
• We must move decisions to the level closest to the people ... no unfunded
mandates from one unit of government to the next.
• We must creatively leverage private and non-profit support. No more one
to one entitlement thinking -- we need to use investment thinking where
one dollar begets 3 or 5 or 9 more ... just like in tourism.
• And my administration will support fees over general taxes where users
have a voice in the rates and the program results.
When you bring your ideas to my administration, be you a citizen, or a lobbyist,
or a legislator or a state employee, bear these beliefs and principles in mind. For
as long as I am Governor, there will be no surprises about why I am signing or
vetoing legislation. Simply look at this list and my rationale should be abundantly
clear. These are my beliefs and principles unless I am convinced through a
visible, public debate that they need to be changed.
Already, I see the problems clearly. First, the executive branch is the only one
that enters the legislative session with a budget that reveals a whole picture of
tax and spend. We base this on the November economic forecast. However,
eight weeks into the Session, neither the House or the Senate has yet to reveal
its spending targets and choices in an accountable way to the people.
Until we stop measuring the success of a legislative session by how many bills
are heard or passed, there is no hope of controlling spending or the sprawl of
government regulation. It's my job to set a vision, not flood this place with pieces
of legislation. It all starts by staying honest to the beliefs and principles that I
have presented in this State of the State Address.
The State of the State is in good hands. The Governor's Office has been
restructured to support the works of these commissioners and directors ... not the
other way around. They are here seated in the center section of the gallery.
Public sector, private sector, Democrats, Republicans, Reform Party,
unaffiliated. What binds us are beliefs in a new day where ideas -- not money --
govern how we work. Who speaks for me? They do. With years of experience,
good judgment, and a strong sense of what needs to be done to serve the
people. That is my leadership commitment to the people of Minnesota -- to hire
the best and brightest and lead as every good CEO leads -- by articulating the
vision, by stating clear expectations, and by holding people personally
accountable through good management practices.

SINCE THE STATE OF THE STATE IS GREAT ... THEN WHERE DO WE GO
FROM HERE?
Any good competitor knows that when you're ahead, you don't rest on your
laurels. Don't get nervous or defensive. You continue to do what you do best,
and hold the lead. It's time to focus on staying competitive and position the state
to keep winning even when the challengers get tougher. Three years from now, I
want my State of the State speech to start out the same way this one did: that
the State of the State is, indeed, great and got greater during the Ventura
Administration. I didn't come here to tinker around the edges of things that need
fixing and I'm willing to tackle the big questions.
QUESTION TWO: Who is responsible for urgently helping the children who
aren't going to pass the Minnesota graduation standards tests in June,
2000? The goal of this administration is to build the strongest public education
system in the world ... but it is only as effective as the resolve of every parent to
step up and be the first and most important teacher a child will have. On that I
will not give an inch. It's so easy to blame the governor, the legislature, teachers,
the school board -- when in reality nothing is successful without every parent
making good decisions, every day, in the best interests of each child. Last month
I recommended nearly $600 million in new investments in is-12 education,
including a very important incentive fund of $150 million for reducing class sizes
Kindergarten through Grade Three. It is my goal to erase the word voucher from
the vocabulary by investing in public education and expecting local school boards
to deliver results.
Now the biggest questions lie ahead.
How can we create a performance-based funding system for Minnesota schools
which ends this complicated funding "shell game" that nobody can understand
any more?
• How can the state give incentives for schools and teachers and students
to do their best without micro managing from the Capitol?
• What will local elected leaders do in every school district to make their
public schools the strongest they can be into the 21st Century?

NEXT QUESTION: If there aren't six people left in the State who can explain
the property tax formula, and none of them think it's fair, why don't we start
over? Let's face it ... we've lost any logic to this system. Property taxes no
longer are tied to the services that are delivered. We have created a so-called
"progressive" tax based on the value of property. It punishes people for doing
the right thing. If I keep up my property, my value and taxes go up even though I
don't need as many local services as the property that has been allowed to
deteriorate and needs inspections, fire protection, or police patrols. It's time to
quit taxing senior citizens out of homes that they own, and force them into
nursing homes or assisted living. It's time to confront the inequities of how we
fund public schools, and how unfair that is to children and taxpayers in
communities all over Minnesota. Even well-intentioned "fixes" end up making the
system more complicated, and one taxpayer's fix becomes another taxpayer's
problem. Reforming the property tax system is one of my administration's
highest priorities.
HERE'S ANOTHER QUESTION: What other tax reforms need
consideration? We need good reforms that are actually put in place rather
than sit on a shelf somewhere. Revenue Commissioner Matt Smith has the job
of untangling this complicated question through a combination of research and
public involvement. We need to pay careful attention to defend our economy
against competition from neighboring states and world markets. It doesn't take
much for Minnesota consumers to migrate over the borders where sales tax or
motor vehicle license fees are lower. Our taxpayers are also calling for income
tax relief, and that demands both immediate and long-term response from
government. We will follow through by tough discipline on spending and action
on tax reforms.
QUESTION: How do we prepare our economy for the future?
Under Trade & Economic Development Commissioner Jerry Carlson, there is a
new strategy to market Minnesota. The vision is as big as the world, and my
administration intends to work with interested businesses and communities to
expand exports and increase investment in Minnesota.
The strategy is about selling tourism and business development, developing
export markets, attracting films, licensing technology, and creating opportunities.

As Governor, I am not an ambassador out there to make people feel good. I'm a
salesman -- I'm out to sell results. When I travel abroad, it will be with a serious
economic plan, well thought through. The trip planned for fall to Japan is the
first effort. Some of you may know that Japanese television carried my
inauguration on national television. With such interest in Minnesota, I would be
foolish not to explore that interest for the betterment of our entire state's
economy.
The urgency of my administration's strategy for new market development is seen
most in the agricultural part of the economy. Short term money relief will not
solve long term agricultural problems. The commissioners of Agriculture, Trade
& Economic Development, Commerce, Finance, and Revenue are working side
by side to invest state tax dollars in projects and programs that truly achieve
economic self-sufficiency. Yes, it is right to step forward and ease a crisis that
affects a specific group of farmers. I have recommended 10 million dollars in
targeted relief for that purpose. My cabinet's recommendation is to provide relief
over the next few years because this is not a one year problem. Commissioner
Gene Hugoson is entrusted to address the long term needs with a vision that
goes beyond the current crisis to get results for agriculture. I am willing to invest
an additional $50 million, for a total of $60 million, in relief over the next three
years to help farm families who are truly in need.
ANOTHER BIG QUESTION: Why don't we have a transportation system
that works after 25 years of investing in planning? I want to stop planning to
do something about transit and urban sprawl and get something DONE. Our
roads have grown more congested and the Twin Cities region has become one
of the most sprawling in the country. In Minnesota, every day an area the size of
the Mall of America gets paved over, and we're still "planning" to do something
about transit and sprawl. I want a transit system that gives people choices, so
they can get where they want to go, when they need to get there. I'll know we're
successful when I can ride light rail from downtown Minneapolis to the Megamall,
and take commuter rail from St. Cloud to the Twin Cities. It's time for action on
transportation, and it's in the hands of Metropolitan Council Chair Ted Mondale
and Transportation Commissioner El Tinklenberg to develop an action plan that
makes sense for the whole state.
AND THE LAST QUESTION IS: What do we do with the one-time tobacco
money?
My commitment to endowing the tobacco settlement money is tied to my belief in
self-sufficiency and improving the lives of Minnesotans. My resolve to endow the
money has grown even stronger since last week when I joined all the national
governors in a meeting with President Clinton. He made it abundantly clear that
the federal government will demand reimbursement for Medicare from the
proceeds of the settlement if it is not used for human services and health care
purposes. These payments, totaling $1.3 billion over five years, are a windfall to

the state of Minnesota ... not an over collection of taxes. It is a once in a lifetime
opportunity to invest in ourselves and our future. I am proposing four
endowments that protect the principal entirely. The interest earnings would be
spent in four areas of self-sufficiency:
It is my hope and expectation that this legislature will consider and agree that
there every reason to invest these resources for the betterment of our health and
all of humanity.
WHAT PRICE TAG GOES ON YOUR HEALTH?
In summary, here is my vision as your new Governor:
ONE -- I want the best public education system in the world, including
higher education.
TWO -- I want a smaller, more efficient government. I envision a more simple
tax system, a more strategic and successful state government working in
partnership -- not against -- local units of government, and a unicameral
legislature that spends at least one year out of four cleaning old and intrusive
laws off the books.
THREE -- I want trade and economic development to be the engine of my
administration.
FOUR -- I want to ride a train by 2002.
FIVE -- I want every person hearing this speech to invest what you can do for
yourself. This notion of self-sufficiency is far from a new idea -- its a Minnesota
idea. It's in our roots and in the character of the people.

they are reforming the world immediately around them by what they do and how
they do it.
Today, as we celebrate that the State of the State is great, let us celebrate five
people who are reforming Minnesota for the better every day through their good
works ... one for each of the months since the election. They are here today to
receive the first Governor's Awards for a Better Minnesota.
Seated in the gallery -- and I would ask that you rise to be recognized as I call
your names:
Last month I had the privilege of presenting the Minnesota Health and Housing
Alliance Caregiver of the Year Award to Johnnie Penrod for 27 years as a
nurses' aide at the Masonic Nursing Home in Bloomington. Any of us who has
ever put a parent into a nursing home hopes that someone who is as
compassionate as Johnnie was there when we could not be. Every caring word
spent in these years of service has made Minnesota a better place.
Joe Lynch, 14 years old, is an 8th grader at St. Bernard's school in St. Paul. Joe
was one of the students who believed in and built a playground last summer
against all odds. When the adults backed out, worried that a playground would
attract gangs and violence, four teams of young believers stepped up to work on
fundraising, a location, equipment, and safety issues. With help from the
Humphrey Institute's Public Achievement project and many businesses and St.
Paul leaders, there is now a better place on the corner of Geranium Street.
Twice during the transition, I was invited to see research projects at the
University of Minnesota. One of those trips was to the Cancer Center, where I
met dedicated researchers seeking new ways to prevent and cure disease.
While this Capitol building preoccupies itself with talk of tobacco settlements, Dr.
Dorothy Hatsukami is unlocking mysteries about nicotine addiction. How and
why do some people become addicted? These and other answers from her
fellow researchers are making Minnesota a better place.
Minneapolis is a better place because of Sam Costa. In January, I was invited to
attend a celebration at Powderhorn School honoring Sam's role in the life of that
neighborhood. A teacher and choreographer, Sam has touched the lives of
many, young and old, in ways that will never, ever be forgotten. Sam served on
the Partners: Arts and Schools for Students (P.A.S.S.) and Minnesota Dance

Affiance boards. He founded the Twin Cities-based contemporary repertory
dance company, 10,000 Dances, and served as the Artistic Director of Young
Dance, a Twin Cities' youth dance company. We honor you today for making
your corner of the world a better place.
Please join me in recognizing these outstanding Minnesotans.
First time voters, young people, and honored Minnesotans -- I offer you these
thoughts with great respect that the future is much more in your hands than in
mine -- or this legislature's. You and the other people must speak to tell us
whether you will participate to make this new day truly work in Minnesota.
It's been said that "The world belongs to those who show up."
Thank you for showing up today. I, too, am very happy to be here.
Thank you.
