Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, Members of the 68th Session of the Minnesota Legislature, Members of the Supreme Court, Constitutional Officers, and fellow citizens of Minnesota:
The last session of this Legislature accomplished a landmark in Minnesota history -- the most basic tax reform in many decades.
This session of the Legislature must do even more. It is our unique mandate to extend the spirit-and energy of reform to government itself.
Two years ago we set out to make state government "more responsive to our people and more imaginative in the service of their needs."
To extend that responsiveness, to enlarge our imagination, is the task before this session. 


Responsiveness must be built upon a new openness in government, an openness beyond any we have known before.
I congratulate you on your own unprecedented efforts toward this goal.
As the first business of this session you are opening doors that until now have been not only closed, but locked.

You are providing for: Fair minority representation. More open committee meetings. More recorded, public votes. More public access to records of your sessions, and all the rest. Those of you who fought for and won these essential reforms should know this; that thanks to you, no one will ever dare to turn back the clock again. But this is just the beginning. We must open up the rest of our governmental and political processes as well. The agenda is long, because for far too long it was ignored. Since 1913, the people of this state have had to wear blindfolds in the voting booth. This session of the Legislature is going to take those blindfolds off! Because our first step must be party designation for all those seeking election to the Minnesota Legislature. The urgency and importance of this measure can be suggested by this comment: If you pass the party designation bill by noon tomorrow, I will sign it before you leave the Capitol that evening. But party designation is only one of our imperatives.


Everyone of us who has ever campaigned knows that there is a deadly cancer infecting our free election system -- the way we are forced to finance our political campaigns.
Open government requires a tough, practical, enforceable disclosure of campaign contributions, and it must be passed this session.
Even disclosure laws, though, are only a very partial solution to the real plague on all our houses.
I have served in state government for 14 years, as a House member, a Senate member, and Governor. I receive great satisfaction from public service, and so do you. I believe in meeting the jury of our citizens in election campaigns" and so do you.
But the traditional way of soliciting campaign money sickens and alienates the public and undermines the very fabric of our institutions.
The late Adlai Stevenson said: "I doubt that it's possible to be elected President .. and deserve the office."
Secretary of Agriculture Earl Butz put it another way:
"Find a Congressman's financial angel. That's the way I worked to beat a bill raising price supports. I called up one chap and started to explain the bill. He said 'Don't bother. I'll just tell the Congressman I don't want it.' He did. That was it."

Every campaign sees the Democrats criticizing the Republicans for outrageous methods of procuring large contributions, and the Republicans accusing the Democrats of precisely the same thing.
Both sides are right, and both sides are guilty. So when some try to make this a partisan issue -- they're fooling no one.
If we really are serious about putting an end to special interest contributions, then the answer isn't merely disclosure or limitations on spending'. It is something much more fundamental.
The only way to really clean up the financing of political campaigns is to provide a method to finance campaigns by hundreds and thousands of small contributors.
And there is only one way to achieve that in the near future. We must give each taxpayer an opportunity to contribute to the party and candidates of his choice.
I recommend that the 1973 Legislature provide for a $1.00 check-off on the state income tax, just as the Congress and the President have attempted to meet this problem at the national level.
This does not mean that the taxpayer would add a dollar when he pays his tax bill. It means that one of the tax dollars he is already paying would be assigned to public financing of election campaigns -- if the taxpayer so chooses.


We would not be forcing anyone to contribute, but we would be providing Minnesota citizens the opportunity to help end a practice that taints us all.
We cannot guarantee that this plan will work perfectly, but if openness and honesty and integrity are to be more than fine words, then we had better try.
We must continue these reform efforts until any American can run for office in this country without losing either his shirt, his self-respect, or his independence -or all three.
To turn, for a moment, to another legislative problem:
We all know the long, complicated, expensive story of legislative reapportionment in 1971. We failed. The Federal Courts, not state officials, finally reapportioned our Legislature -- and barely in time.
We did redistrict the Congressional seats. And we did what we usually do when we redistrict. We protected the incumbents. In fact, we gave six of them even safer seats -- which took some doing. That's wrong. That's not open government. That doesn't give the people the chance to change things. I believe a candidate from either party ought to have at least a fighting chance to win. We made this more difficult -- perhaps impossible.

And that's what we will do again unless we find a new way to reapportion and redistrict.
I propose a Constitutional Amendment to take Legislative and Congressional reapportionment out of the hands of the Legislature and assign it to a bi-partisan commission, as recommended by the Constitutional Study Commission.
I fully support this top priority recommendation of the Commission.
I also support another legislative ,reform. Two years ago I recommended that the Legislature cut its size effective after the 1980 census, if a reduction could not be accomplished in the reapportionment process. I still support such a measure, and I hope the 1973 Legislature will pass it. Our citizens also deserve better opportunities to vote. In the 1972 campaign in Minnesota, several hundred thousand potential voters failed to register, in spite of a vigorous bi-partisan- registration effort. This Legislature must give serious consideration to a system which permits a voter to register on election day if he has not already done so. Voting is a right and not a privilege. We must insure the people access to that fundamental right.

I do not need to inform the members of this Legislature that perhaps the best way to open a unit of government to the people is to require that its members be elected. Accordingly, I strongly recommend that this session of the Legislature transform the Metropolitan Council potentially the most innovative force in our largest urban area -- from an appointive to an elective body.

As a result, we are faced today with a conflict in metropolitan government, a vagueness over lines of authority, an impasse over how decisions should be made that affect directly the lives of half the people of this state. Today's indecision is the price of yesterday's neglect. The failure to fully define and anticipate the role of metropolitan government is becoming clearer each day.
I am convinced that history will show our efforts at metropolitan government to be among the most significant innovations ever begun by a State Legislature. Our response must recognize that significance.
I ask this session to give major priority of time and attention to metropolitan .government, to establishing clearly its authority and framework. We must treat this as a necessity, not an afterthought.
We also need to open up the executive branch of state government.
Perhaps the greatest strength of our system is that elected officials are held strictly accountable for the performance of their administrations.
What concerns me is that I want to hold our key state department heads equally accountable for their departments and the responsibilities we place on them.

But that!s not really possible when we deny to some department heads, with thousands of employees, the right to choose their own management teams, of even 3 or 4. For example, we have an outstanding Commissioner of Highways with over 5,000 employees in his department and we do not permit him to select a single one when he takes office.
There is a danger that we have given the entrenched bureaucracy a veto over the elected representatives of the people.
That's wrong. We must change it. I will ask for appropriate changes in the laws to assure the responsiveness and accountability of our administrative leadership. Another method, long overdue, for opening and strengthening state government is to place more representatives of the public on policy boards and commissions. We can increase the size of boards where necessary to make room for public members. Finally, the people's right to know is not guaranteed by the openness of government alone. These times also demand that we take steps in Minnesota to protect reporters from intimidation by government in carrying on their legitimate work.

A number of newsmen are now in jail around the country for refusing to reveal confidential sources. I regret that the pressure seems to be increasing.
Reporters are being prosecuted not because they are irresponsible, but precisely because they have been responsible to their basic function of publishing the truth.
Everyone in public life occasionally disagrees with some article or coverage. But government officials who fear the press, and seek to suppress it, are very short-sighted indeed. For our system of government itself would die without the freedom of speech and freedom of the press guaranteed us in the First Amendment.
Several states now have laws that shield reporters from revealing confidential sources of information. I recommend the passage of such a bill by this Legislature.
I hope that these recommendations for open government will be acted upon by the Legislature. And I hope you will go on from there to carry out the spirit of openness with which this session has begun.
And now, let us turn to the value that our people receive from their tax dollars.
The last session of the Legislature was known for its successful attempt to bring justice to our state tax system. This session must become known for bringing justice to the spending of those tax dollars.


Many Minnesotans believe there is waste and inefficiency in state government. The major reason they believe so is that there is waste and inefficiency in our state government.
For example, more than 3,000 dormitory beds are empty across the public college campuses of our state.
They are empty because of poor planning. The State of Minnesota built more dormitories than it needs. The people of Minnesota are paying the price and will continue to pay it for a long time to come.
We know that more and more elementary school classrooms are standing empty -- not ancient, decrepit buildings for the most part, but relatively recent facilities built at considerable cost to the taxpayers of those districts.
In one of our state departments, there are three vehicles for each employee -- and the grass grows high around some of those vehicles.
One of our state college campuses, the newest facility in the system, stands with twice as many classrooms as it needs. Present projections are that many or most of those classrooms will never be needed on that campus.
Some major and expensive mistakes have been made. They were not deliberate. Many of us here helped make them.

But they wasted state tax dollars. And wasted dollars do not serve human needs. Every wasted dollar, every short-range commitment that comes back to haunt us with long-range consequences, deprives the people of the state of funds
that could go to meet urgent human needs.
The need for economy in state government has never been so clear. The sick and the handicapped and the helpless will be properly served only when first-rate, tough, hard planning and management are required of every department and agency in this state. We can no longer tolerate a situation where Chambers of Commerce in the communities of our state are pitted against one another in a desperate effort to lobby for short-range advantages, and state pOlicy becomes a matter of who wins the battle.
This was the old way of doing things. We cannot afford it, now or ever again.
That is why I am so pleased with the success of one of the most remarkable projects ever undertaken in state government.
The State of Minnesota is a large and complex enterprise with a multi-billion dollar budget. If we were listed on the Fortune magazine list of 500 largest corporations in the nation, we would be 37th from the top.


with this in mind we asked Minnesota's businessmen to share their expertise with the state. We wanted the state to adopt the best most modern business procedures and techniques, wherever possible.
The response from the business community was overwhelming.
Since June, the Loaned Executives Action Program, known as L.E.A.P., has provided the state with a staff of 74 full-time and 26 part-time people, representing 50 of the top corporations in the state. Under the capable direction of Douglas Dayton, they have devoted the equivalent of 26 man-years to the examination of our state government at no expense to the state.
They sent us their best. We are now receiving 139 separate, far-reaching reports on our various agencies and departments. L.E.A.P.'s summary report will be published in the next few days. I was surprised, and pleased, and very, very grateful to the Minnesota business community for its toughness and candor. Let me" assure you that they did not tell us only those things they thought we wanted to hear. Now we have the job of following through. We must continue to keep the pressure on every state department and on ourselves. The dollars we save will serve the people of our state.

The L.E.A.P. report also includes legislative recommendations. They will be forwarded to you during the coming weeks as we are able to prepare and refine them, and I hope you will give them earnest consideration.
And may I state my strong hope that other units of government will seek the counsel and management capabilities of our business community too. There is no unit of government that cannot greatly improve its effectiveness through such cooperation. I include, most specifically, our local school boards, who are responsible for spending a very major portion of the revenues which are raised within the state.
Two major L.E.A.P. recommendations for reorganizing the central administration of state government will be among my legislative requests -- the centralizing of our state personnel administration and the strengthening of our budgeting, finance, and auditing processes. These steps are extremely important to real economy in our state government.
And I will make one other major legislative request to improve our state government as well.
In part, the respect and esteem we have for the people of our state and their government can be measured by the priority and concern we give to attracting the most talented, the best trained, the best equipped people to state service. That is how we provide the kind of state service our people deserve.
But our state government finds it very difficult to compete for those people.

When I assumed office, I knew that we were not competitive with private business and school districts. But I was alarmed to discover that the state could not compete with county and city governments for comparable talent.
The problem is not just salaries. In a recent survey of retirement benefits for 41 states, for employees with 20 years of service, Minnesota ranked 39th from the top. We were ahead of Nebraska and South Dakota, and behind everybody else. For retirees with 30 years of service, we were not much better -- 36th of the 41 states in the survey. What does this mean? It means that it is very difficult to attract the best qualified men and women to state government, no matter how dedicated they are. And it means that people who devote their lives to our state government receive almost nothing in return. A psychiatric technician at one of our state hospitals, with 20 years of devotion to the mentally ill, can retire with $107 a month under our present retirement program. A highway technician, with 20 years of service, retires at the handsome rate of $101 per month. A senior highway maintenance worker, with 32 years of state service, receives just $213 a month.

.A Senior Division Head, one of our top management employees, with 46 years service, earns just $5,600 a year in retirement benefits. After 46 years. And that's at the top of our scale.
Our mandatory retirement age is 70 for the state retirement system. Few retire any earlier. They simply can't afford it.
And just as with any other employee, the retirement age for custody officers in our corrections system is also 70, with poor retirement benefits.
The present system insures that people 68 and 69 years old must deal with prisoners and the criminally insane who are half their age and several times their strength.
Too old to perform the job as it should be performed, unwilling to retire to a humiliating pension, they keep on -- as well as they can.
This is the most appalling, the most dangerous waste in state government that I know.
There is only one answer. We must improve our retirement benefits. We must reduce the age for mandatory retirement to 65, and to age 55 for custody officers at our prisons and security hospitals and others whose lives and abilities are placed in jeopardy ..

Under this plan, between 1,500 to 1,800 employees would be able to retire by the end of the next biennium.
We can bring more than 150 young, strong, trained new employees into service for our corrections system alone.
My budget message will contain more specific information on this proposal.
With this retirement program, with careful review of all vacant positions, and with the recommendations on complement that I will make in my budget message, I am today setting the goal of trying to reduce "the number of Minnesota state employees by five percent by the end of the next biennium.
I believe that can be accomplished while improving the quality of services provided by the state.
With your help, an improved retirement program is another step we can take to provide real economy in state government. 

Neither open government nor economy in government is justified solely for its own sake.
But openness and economy will better equip us to meet the central purpose of government, which is to anticipate and meet human needs.
These needs are many and complex.

In the field of human rights, there are several steps that must be taken now.
Our first priority must be ratification of the Federal Equal Rights Amendment. I fully support and strongly encourage such action, as you know.
But $tate government should also lead the way in making employment and promotions available on a non-discriminatory basis to minorities and women. Our state has not led the way. We must catch up and move ahead. It is a necessary, basic human commitment.
Therefore, I will ask the Legislature to provide support for the state Affirmative Action Program instituted this Fall by Executive Order.
I will also ask the Legislature to extend our anti-discrimination laws to cover the handicapped, and place this new responsibility in the Department of Human Rights.
With a proper opportunity to try, many of our handicapped citizens can become both productive and independent.
They deserve to be judged on their capability to do the work, yet they are often automatically excluded because of their handicaps. Placing them under the antidiscrimination laws is a necessary first step to opportunity.

Another significant step this Legislature must take is to lower the age of majority to 18 years in Minnesota.
Our laws clearly discriminate against 18 to 20 year old citizens. We have already given these citizens the right to vote by amendment of the Federal Constitution. With that amendment we extended to them the most precious right that can be exercised. It would be hypocritical now to attempt to deny these young people their other rights as well, including the right to hold public office.
The needs of the average workingmen and women of Minnesota constitute a very major order of unfinished business that awaits resolution by this session of the Legislature.
This Legislature should pass a state minimum wage law tied to the Federal Minimum Wage which will reflect all future federal increases. The current $1.75 per hour Federal Minimum Wage should be provided for all full time workers. Time and one-half should be provided for all hours worked in excess of forty hours a week.
We must also increase Unemployment Compensation benefits. Increases should reflect the earning level of the worker.

Our law now provides a weekly benefit equal to fifty percent of the average weekly wage of the worker, subject to a maximum of $64. Thus, regardless of how high an individual's earnings may have been, he cannot collect a weekly benefit in excess of $64.
I recommend that the maximum be changed from $64 to sixty percent of the average weekly wage paid in Minnesota in the preceding year.
Coverage should also be extended to include a number of farm workers. I recommend that agricultural employers who employ a total of four or more workers for twenty or more weeks should be required to provide benefits.
We should also extend Unemployment Compensation benefits to workers who are put out of work by labor disputes in which they are not participants.
Along with adequate wages and benefits, I am equally concerned that working conditions be as safe and as healthy as possible. The new Federal Occupational Safety and Health Act is an important tool to help us achieve these ends.
My Budget will contain requests for state matching funds to permit implementation of OSHA in Minnesota as quickly as possible so that Minnesota's work force may derive maximum benefit.

Workers who are injured on the job should be guaranteed maximum allowable Workmen's Compensation. We need to integrate our benefits with the new disability provisions under the Social Security Act.
We intend to continue to scrutinize carefully how our state programs can be coordinated with federal programs to maximize benefits for all Minnesota workers.
Fair treatment for Minnesota's workers will also require revision of the Public Employees Labor Relations Act.
A means must be provided to settle impasse situations.
I recommend that the Act be amended to provide for voluntary binding arbitration.
The Act should also be clarified to distinguish between supervisory and non-supervisory personnel.
And no consideration of human needs in Minnesota can omit the very real and growing threat to our family farmers.
In California, 45 conglomerates own 61 percent of all the farm land in the state.
I don't want that to happen here. These figures reflect a major threat to the quality of life of any state. We can still protect our family farms by passing the Family Farm Act of 1973 which will restrict the right of conglomerates and huge foreign corporations to penetrate and take over our family farm system in Minnesota.

I have also signed an Executive Order creating a Rural Development Council, as I indicated I would a few weeks ago.
This Council will be instrumental, I predict, in organizing the resources of state government to focus on the needs of outstate Minnesotans.
Our Vietnam veterans also deserve our help. They served bravely in a war that they should not have had to fight at all. I know we share the commitment made by our voters last November to provide a Vietnam Bonus.
In my Budget Message two weeks from now, I will identify additional legislative priorities.
That Message will deal in detail with education, corrections, welfare, the environment, and the other basic issues confronting our people.
I stated at the outset of this Message that this session of the Legislature is faced with a mandate unique in Minnesota history. I know that you can meet and fulfill that mandate, for this session is itself unique in the annals of our Legislature.
This uniqueness goes beyond even the unprecedented alignment of the caucuses. It goes beyond partisan allegiance and relates more fundamentally to the kind of men and women who now serve in both our Houses.

I don't believe that any session of our Minnesota Legislature has ever been composed of as high a percentage of new members as this one. I don't believe that any session has been as youthful. I know that no other session has had as many women members.
This newness, this freshness provides us with a special opportunity to demonstrate to the people of Minnesota that "Government works ... and it works for them."
That is what this session is uniquely qualified to do,. To fail would be tragic, to succeed would be to found a whole new era in our public life.
So let us begin this historic session knowing that the only restraints on progress are timidity and doubt. Let our vision be worthy of our mandate. Let each horizon become a threshold.
Let this be a session in which government does work for the people. Starting now.
Thank you.

Mr. Speaker Mr. President members of the minnesota legislature judges of the minnesota supreme court distinguished guests and fellow citizens of minnesota:
Yesterday you reconvened for the final weeks of the 68th legislative session that began more than a year ago.
This is not the beginning of your deliberations.
Nor will they end in these few weeks. For the work you take up again today is the continuation of anew approach to the legislative process in minnesota a recognition that responsive government requires our constant attention.

you are not assembled here after months of rest} but after months of hard work.
The times demand that kind of devotion.
It would be easy to be discouraged today} for this is a dark and frustrating time.
Many americans are pessimistic. Many americans are losing faith--not just in government} but in nearly all the institutions of our economic and political system.
That is not difficult to understand. For most} it is a struggle just to meet the payroll} or pay all the bills and make ends meet. Nine out of ten americans believe they will be worse off next year than they are now.
They do not believe government--or any institution--will help.
Still in the aftermath of a senseless war} they now see the blatant misuse of power in our national public life.

it is tempting to call this crisis national-for it is. But we dare not use that fact as an excuse. We must not evade our own responsibility or squander our opportunity to help the nation find its way.
So the question before us today is what we can do in minnesota in these final legislative weeks to address these problems and to bring back confidence. That question comes at a time when we are faced by the most frustrating single element of the crisis
our overpowering concern continues,to be the shortage of energy.
We still lack basic information that we know we can rely on.
The facts seem to change almost every day on any part of the problem you might ask about.
After.All this time the magnitude of the problem ranges from zero to disaster depending on who is describing it at the moment.
Congressman john zwach expressed the frustration of all of us when he said last week:
Hi get as many conflicting reports as anybody else. We have to rely too much on oil companies. I think they tell us what they want to tell."

our federal energy coordinator bill simon has ordered a federal audit of supply information among the oil companies. It is the only way he says to find out the truth about supplies and price increases.
Two weeks ago in the new york times anthony lewis felt the crisis was so critical that he called for a program to put all our motorists on buses and bicycles.
But on the very same page of the same newspaper on the same day christopher rand said there was no crisis at all plenty of energy for everybody. His article was headlined "oil oil everywhere."
as we address the energy priority in this legislative session there are no proven model programs for states to install. But we do know several truths here in minnesota.
We have been incredibly wasteful as individuals and a nation.
With six percent of the world's population we consume more than a third of the world's energy each year'.
There is another truth: Our american love affair with the automobile has starved mass transit . Blinded us while the railroads abandoned this country and crippled intercity bus service.

we are overly dependent on the automobile. In this state there are nearly two automobiles in operation for each family.
Too many drive cars when it's not necessary. Too many students drive short distances to school. Too many people still choose to drive alone.
But even these truths are not the whole story. Our crisis is not due to waste alone.
During november of 1972approximately 177 million gallons of gasoline and 133 million gallons of heating oil were sold in minnesota. One year later in november of 1973 the number of gallons sold was just about the same.
But not the price per gallon. That was up -50 percent for heating oil and 30 percent for gasoline. And those prices are still rising.
Last year 1200 service stations closed their doors. Ladies and gentlemen that's 1200 in minnesota not america. Almost all small independent businessmen.
But not everybody has been suffering. The profits of the major international oil companies for just the third quarter of 1973 alone were up as much . As 91 percent over the year before.

so profits are up and competition is down. I don't believe that was done to help us through the winter.
That is another truth we know.
We also know that some will try to use the energy shortage as an excuse to abandon our effort to provide a cleaner environment for our children.
That is not the answer. And we will not let it happen.
One further truth: Our people have already shown that they are willing to help and sacrifice-if it's really needed and everybody does it together.
These are all facts we rely upon.
And so our goals in minnesota are clear and essential:
It is our job as astate to protect our " people with all the strength we have.
It is our job to keep our people working and our farmers farming.
It is our job to preserve the ability of industry and small business to support a strong minnesota economy.

and it is our job as astate to pay more thoughtful attention to the future to stop waste and maintain the fragile energy balance that supports our prosperity and our quality of life.
We need information. We need to make ourselves heard in washington. We need to develop a state energy policy.
And to achieve those things we have nowhere to turn but to ourselves.
That is why i. Re-emphasize my support today for the creation of a department of energy as provided in legislation authored by representative willard munger and senators alec olson and win borden. I am grateful for the leadership they are providing.
We need a strong visible permanent agency to develop information and recommend policy. We must give it some authority over the growth and conservation of energy supplies in our state. It must draw together . The expert knowledge and efforts of all our great public and private institutions.
I urge the passage of this legislation. We must get on with the job.

we must also respond to the federal legislation requiring speed limits that do not exceed 55 miles per hour on our state highways. And as more federal requirements are seti we have a continuing responsibility to cooperate.
It is also essential to give our school districts the flexibility they need to adjust to energy conservation practices and meet shortages that may develop. And we need to clarify the authority of our state executive council to deal with emergencies.
Finally we must take direct steps to reduce our excessive reliance on the automobile.
We must get people out of automobiles.
But that means getting as many people as possible into community transit systems not only in the twin cities metropolitan area but all across the state.
We cannot accomplish that in a single week. But we cannot accomplish it at all without providing more state support.'
the basic issue is,whether we should use state funds to improve public transportation.

only 54 percent of minnesota's population is concentrated in the 13 communities with mass transit systems. The other 46 percent do not have such transportation available to them.
Now why should senator roger moe from ada or dick fitzsimons from argyle or representative neil haugerud from way down in preston support state funds for transit for city folks?
Their people are not served by community transit. Some would argue that their districts will not benefit.
But it will. I'll tell you why.
Because you want those city drivers to stop using their cars.
If you want to convince a driver in st. Paul or st. Cloud or rochester or moorhead or mankato or duluth to take the bus to work or school or just downtown there must be service that is inexpensive} convenient and comfortable.
That's not the way it is today.

you can't expect people to give up their cars to ride on buses that haven't been built. Along routes that don't exist: Take trains that are no longer in service on roadbeds that are no longer safe.
And so they drive their cars.
Every gallon of gasoline they use in those cars is not available for your tractors farm implements and trucks to plant and cultivate the crops and take the harvest to market.
It is a gallon of gasoline that wasn't saved for a trip to a minnesota resort community.
It is a gallon of gasoline that can't be used to bring merchandise to a small-town minnesota store.
But if we don't use that gasoline in our cars there's a better chance it will be there for farms and factories and businesses.
That is why i urge you to provide $6 million of state funds to improve community transit operations throughout minnesota and explore the possibility of developing them here they do not exist.

this strong commitment to improving community transit operations is a major step we can take in this session to change the way we live in a society where energy conservation is absolutely essential.
Not just for this winter or the next eighteen months. But for the foreseeable future.
In addition i am recommending once again that you give final approval to senator alec olson and representative irv anderson's $200 million highway and transit bonding bill. It not only provides $80 million for community transit: It also provides $120 million to help upgrade unsafe rural highways.
There are no magic buttons for state governments to press. If we do all of these things the energy crisis will not disappear.
But they are a necessary start and now is the time to begin.

the shortage of energy is frustrating and inconvenient and threatening. But it is also an opportunity to improve" the real standards of our living} to strengthen the pattern of our lives.
I know how difficult it may be in the months and years ahead. But in the long run} we will be a stronger state and nation and a better people as a result of facing up to the energy crisis.
We will be less wasteful and more saving.
The quality of our environment will improve.
We have another commitment to keep before this session ends.
Everyone has been saddened and embarrassed by the revelations of arrogance and illegal activity on the national level that have broken over us during the past months.
No other development has been so responsible for undermining our faith.
Everyone in this chamber--from whatever political persuasion--has been cheated by these events.

everyone here knows that we cannot cast aside their implications.
To the people of this state who are listening to us today i want to emphasize this point.
We have all read a great deal about this national tragedy. But i have been in politics and government for more than sixteen years.
And i know the minnesota republican party is not like that. The minnesota democratic-farmer-labor is not like that.
The men and women who participate in politics in political parties and in government in minnesota are not like that.
Minnesota is not like that. Not in the past not in the present and god willing never in the future.
But we have been flirting with disaster for years in minnesota as well as the nation.
For as i said here a year ago) the way we are forced to finance our election campaigns is a deadly cancer infecting our free election system.

this state of ours has produced more than its share of presidential candidates and national leaders in public life.
We are the nation's model in so many ways.
Now we must exert national leadership in reforming the election process as well.
That means realistic limits on campaign spending.
It means mandatory disclosure of contributions.
It means moving toward broad based public support through the $1.00 check off system.
It means a tough and impartial ethics commission to give the most careful attention to the supervision of elections and the political activities of elected office holders.
The legislation being carried by senators north and keefe and representative tom berg is before you.
No one claims it is perfect or that it should be exempt from reasonable debate.

but we do know that the major thrust of this legislation is both essential and overdue.
Its defeat would be intolerable.
The people of minnesota will not accept excuses. And they should not. There is too much at stake.
We must give our attention to other important legislation as well.
I have a prejudice.
I believe that pride in home ownership is one of the great strengths of our society. Home ownership supports the quality neighborhoods our children deserve.
Nearly 72 percent of our minnesota homes are owned by those who live in them.
People who own their homes have a stake in their neighborhoods and they know it.
Yet this cornerstone of our quality of life is being threatened. Ordinary citizens find it difficult and often impossible today to buy new homes or even improve the homes in which they are living. Federal assistance does not begin to meet this problem.

that is why two months ago senate majority leader coleman and house speaker sabo joined me in proposing anew housing rehabilitation program.
A large portion of our minnesota residences are in need of repair. The program we are urging you to pass will provide $100 million in revenue bonds for small housing improvement loans at low interest rates.
There is another important matter on which time is running out.
It was widely predicted last january that this would be the session in which no-fault insurance became law in minnesota. There is still time to do so.
And i very strongly urge you to make this prediction come true. We need no-fault insurance--we need a reduction in the premiums our people pay.
Another area that requires action this
year is metropolitan planning and development.
Let me express my gratitude for the great time and effort that has been given to questions of metropolitan government by this legislature since i noted a year ago that such attention was long overdue.

i am well aware that there are important legitimate differences on questions of substance---on metropolitan issues that still divide the senate and house committees.
Answers to such basic questions should not come easily. But they should come soon--and in the spirit of compromise that marks the governmental process.
Many of our metropolitan concerns require immediate attention.
We must find a way to help communities develop additional parks and open spaces before the spaces and the opportunity disappear.
And the energy crisis demands that this legislature commit itself to the preparation of a comprehensive metro transit plan to be reviewed and approved when you meet again in 1975.
In the end, effective action on these metropolitan questions will help to reassure our citizens that state government can respond to the common needs.

we should also establish an independent board for the selection of design architects and engineers for state projects as senator coleman and representative irv anderson are proposing.
We should insure the protection of parochial school tax credits that have already been granted and explore alternative ways of keeping a strong dual system of public and private education in our state.
Under the new federal income plan for the aged blind and disabled we should supplement payments for all who meet our previous state standards of eligibility
we need some immediate capacity plan the future shape of our human services system in minnesota.
We should consider a state program of low interest loans for community health and mental health facilities including group homes.
We should make certain that needy people do not suffer financial losses under the general assistance reforms provided in 1973.

we should consider state regulation of our minnesota utilities.
The list could be still longer. I know that you will give attention to many of these items and others on your own agendas.
But i ask you to concentrate on the priorities:
To act with deliberate speed and minimum partisanship.
I feel privileged to have worked with a legislature that dared so much and has already achieved so much.
It is tempting to list your record--the senior citizen tax freeze, help for the handicapped, environmental protection, the veterans bonus, significant consumer legislation, the minimum wage and public employee bargaining laws, restrictions on corporate farming, more openness in the conduct of government at all levels, maintenance of fair school finance and property tax relief.
Our business today is what you still must dol not what you have done.

our people appreciate the effort you have made.
For minnesotans are aware of what kind of state and what kind of people we are.
The real strength of our state springs from the talent1 energy and humane commitment of our people.
I am optimistic about our future.
Our people are resilient and responsive and realistic.
They can live with the truth.
They do not accept easy rhetoric and impossible promises. But they do recognize and support performance.
They have heard the warnings of these troubled days.
And so must we.

Dear Mr. Speaker, Mr. Majority Leader, and Members of the 69th Session of the Minnesota Legislature:
As you reconvene for the remaining weeks of the 69th Session of the Minnesota Legislature, your extensive interim activities have been well reported, and the substance of important legislation before you is well-known to all of us and to the people of Minnesota. For that reason, I have not asked for an opportunity to appear before you to deliver a formal State of the State message, as I did in 1974.
It is helpful to have available the Senate Majority Caucus list of priority concerns, and I am also pleased to have had the opportunity to discuss the coming session with the leadership of both houses. You can be certain that my office will cooperate with your wish for a brief session, including the deadlines for committee action established by the Legislative Coordinating Committee. Although the business before this session has' major significance for many of our people, I certainly agree with you that there is no need for a long session this year.
Before summarizing those legislative items that deserve attention, in my judgment, it seems desirable to report briefly on the state's financial condition at this time.
As you know, the Department of Finance and the Department of Revenue have reported that state revenue for the first six months of the current fiscal year was approximately $32 million
above the projections adopted by the Legislature in its 1975 budget

considerations, but an uncertain farm income picture raises the possibility that income tax revenues will fall $30 million to $40 million below estimates for the remaining months of the fiscal year.
Further information will become available next month for use by the Legislature. At this point, there is no reason to modify the Legislature's previous projections of state revenue available for the biennium. Overall Federal budgeting for the 1976-1977 fiscal year, including the prospects for general revenue-sharing, is still undetermined. The condition of the nation's economy remains uncertain for the same period. Projections for the second year of our budgeting period must therefore be considered uncertain.
Based on 1975 projections, we can look forward toa balanced state budget if we continue to monitor expenditures very carefully. The 1975 Legislature concluded its work with approximately $65 million of projected revenue remaining unspent, but with bills totalling approximately $63.5 million awaiting final passage.
Of these appropriations, the Legislative Advisory Commission, as you know, has anticipated immediate 1976 passage of H.F.l741, funding semi-state agencies, and has provided funds to the affected agencies on a contingency basis. Appropriation of approximately $9.6 million for that purpose will leave approximately $53.8 million of projected revenues for the biennium available for 1976 decisions.
That amount represents less than 1.2 percent of total projected revenues for the 1975-1977 biennium. Since Minnesota law provides that our budget must be balanced, our remaining resources are obviously very limited.
In addition to the semi-state appropriation, two other bills constitute items for priority action, in my judgment.
The first is H.F. 1199, providing approximately $7 million for drug and alcohol outreach and treatment. I support the proposed modification of this legislation that would use a portion of the funds to supplement 1975 appropriations for our state system of

The Honorable Martin Olav Sabo The Honorable Nicholas D. Coleman Page 3 January 21, 1976
local detoxification centers. There has been excellent and serious participation by chemical dependency specialists in government and private agencies in developing this legislation and recommending its outreach procedures. I urge its quick passage, with the modifications that have been developed.
The other major priority for 1976 action, in my jUdgment, is H.F. 1137, which provides approximately $40 million for additional efforts by our Minnesota Housing Finance Agency to make decent housing available where it is needed most. In my Inaugural and Budget addresses a year ago, I strongly recommended such legislation and I hope the Legislature will quickly approve this important improvement in our state housing program.
It is also vital to make two adjustments in existing legislation to meet problems that have become apparent since you met in 1975. Our state unemployment tax must be increased by one-tenth of one percent so that we continue to qualify for interest-free loans from the federal government until a recovering economy restores the level of our state unemployment compensation fund. And we must change a provision of the 1975 tax relief legislation that unintentionally disqualified senior citizens in subsidized housing from receiving property tax relief as renters.
Other important legislation now in final stages includes S.F. 919, to improve our environmental permit processes; S.F. 1308, to clear up a number of problems related to public water drainage in our state; H.F. 1206, establishing land use grants for local governments; and H.F. 645, establishing local community health programs in our state. Within the financial resources available, and considering other needs which may develop during the session, these measures deserve your continuing support .
. For five years, the legislative and executive branches have been working to bring together our fragmented transportation efforts under a Department of Transportation, and I hope that action can be completed this year if possible. The Legislature should also give serious consideration to a special state bonding program to provide much-needed repairs to the most seriously deteriorating highway bridges in our state, and I reiterate my support for up to $200 million of bonding for that purpose. We must face up to this need sooner or later.

Throughout your 1975 deliberations substantial committee attention has been devoted to the question of legislative, executive and judicial salaries in Minnesota. As you know, I have proposed that the Legislature create a special commission, like the one that is operating successfully in the state of Michigan, to establish these salaries with review by the Legislature. However, whether that structure is adopted or not, it is vital to reach consensus on salaries this year for all three branches of our state government, so that reasonable pay adjustments for state government service can be put into effect. Timing is especially critical for legislative compensation, since adjustments cannot be granted for members of the 1977-1978 Legislature unless they are acted upon this year.
As chairman of Minnesota's Bicentennial observance, the Lieutenant Governor of Minnesota will be proposing small state subsidies for Minnesota communities that undertake special Bicentennial observances. I recommend that an appropriate amount of state funds be provided for this purpose.
I also urge your favorable consideration of proposed legislation to establish a Legislative Commission on the Economic Status of Women.
Many other matters will be before you in the next few weeks, including possible action to help insure that our major league sports teams and our major league arts institutions will be available to our people; proposed energy conservation requirements; changes in our criminal sentencing procedures; the adequacy of our maximum security prison" facilities; the unfortunate availability of alcoholic beverages to high school students; the availability of bilingual and bicultural education for students who have difficulty with the English language; revisions of our laws governing nursing home regulation; railroad improvements, and metropolitan land use planning, among others. Thoughtful attention has been given to these issues during interim meetings of legislative committees. They deserve your continued attention and action if time permits.
The wisdom of our flexible session arrangement is demonstrated by the opportunity it gives us this year to devote additional and thoughtful legislative and executive consideration to matters of significance to the people of Minnesota. The Legislature appears

well-prepared for the remaining weeks of the session. The major issues that require attention are relatively few, but we are fortunate to have the opportunity to address them now.
My office and my staff will continue to be available to provide information and assistance as the members of the Legislature desire. We join you in anticipating a brief but productive completion of the agenda of the 69th Session of the Minnesota State Legislature.
With warmest regards.
Mr. Chief Justice, Members of the Court, Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the 70th Session of the Minnesota Legislature, fellow constitutional officers, distinguished guests, and fellow citizens:

This is the beginning of my eighth full day as Governor of Minnesota. It's my first opportunity to appear before you.

Some of you have been my friends and colleagues in Minnesota state government for as long as fourteen years.

You have shared the burden--and satisfaction--of making this the most progressive and successful state in the union.

To those of you who are here for the first time, as new members of this outstanding Legislative body, I say "Welcome".

To the veteran Legislators in this Assembly, and to your 1eaders, I say "Well done".

This is the hardest working, most productive Legislature in the nation. And in terms of records of accomplishments, it is one of the most underpaid.


As one with a deep interest in Minnesota history I can tell you today that we have never had a Governor who has accomplished more than Wendell Anderson.

And we never had a Legislature that made as big a mark on the life of Minnesota people as you have made in the past four years.

It is now our challenge to continue that remarkable record.

I'm not here today to layout a detailed Legislative program or budget. We will be back in this Chamber in twenty days to begin that task. Today I simply want to tell you how I feel about Minnesota, our government and our people.

This nation has just ended its Bicentennial year. It is not a conclusion, it is just a beginning.

In this first year of America's third century it is time to look ahead to what the future holds for the people of our state. I know our people and I am optimistic.

As Minnesota's chairman of the Bicentennial I have traveled to more Minnesota communities and met more Minnesota citizens than any other elected official in our 119-year history. They have taught me the meaning of the Minnesota spirit.

The people of this state are an inexhaustible resource of faith and optimism! pride and high expectations. They try hard. They work hard. They look forward to better lives for themselves! their children! and to those who haven't been so fortunate.
Our people are committed to education and to opportunity. They believe you can succeed if you work at it.
They know Minnesota is not perfect. But they think we do better than just about anybody else. They are proud of the Minnesota effort to build and maintain a high quality of life. They support the Minnesota partnership for progress--with personal effort and the hard cash of their tax dollars. And they expect their leaders to live up to their promises and live up to their ability. We can do that and now is the time to begin.
Minnesota is just emerging from a damaging national recession. Our economy has done better than the nation's. Our unemployment is far below the national average. Our state budget is balanced. And our state credit is good.
But too many Minnesota workers still do not have jobs. And a savage unrelenting drought has struck a tragic blow to farm families! the communities! and our vital farm economy.
Raging forest fires have severely damaged our important timber! resort and outdoor recreational industries.

The most important thing we have to do this year is to put people back to work. 

And we can do that.

First, through an even stronger state housing effort, to create productive jobs for construction workers and help people find decent places to 1ive.

Second, through the Governor's Task Force on drought aid
we established last week, to bring state and federal resources to
bear on the immediate problems of our farmers.

Third, through using special resources to provide temporary work for farm families and others in need of help.

Today I am announcing a special $2 million work program for hard-pressed farm families in our worst drought areas. We will use federal funds from the 1976 Public Works Employment Act. We will offer public service jobs for up to 15 weeks at prevailing wages. The Governor1s Manpower Office and the State Department of Agriculture will put this program into operation this week.

These are not state government jobs. They will not affect our state budget. But they are a responsible and productive way to make use of federal help.

These temporary jobs will help our farm area families who are suffering the most. They will help farmers through the winter to spring planting time. And that is what we must do.

Fourth, we can, and must, do much more to develop good economic information and sound economic planning in Minnesota. In the long run, that is how we can insure permanent jobs and stable economic growth.
We can do better. And I will ask the Minnesota State Planning Agency to see that we do.
Fifth, our state is already a research and development center for electronics, computer technology and agriculture. Expanding our knowledge has meant expanded job opportunities. As one example, the University of Minnesota developed a way to use low-grade ore, revitalized the mining industry and created thousands of jobs.
The main emphasis of my message today is jobs. But we can also do better in health.
The state is blessed with many of the best health care resources in the nation.
We have excellent professional training. We work hard to improve the environment in which our people live. And we have superior health facilities.
But we are missing some great opportunities. Health care costs are too high. We don't put enough emphasis on illness prevention, on physical fitness or active recreation. We should do more in making progress against serious and crippling diseases.

We have made many important state commitments in the past six years. This year we need to dedicate a portion of our human and financial resources to finding some of the answers to better health care for more people.
Every dollar of our investment will bring five six or seven additional dollars of federal private and foundation funds. I believe we can keep such a commitment and I hope you will help me do it.
Minnesota's environmental quality and energy crisis also demands our serious attention.
The Dakota Indians named the state Minnesota -- "Minne" for water and "Sota" for white.
The Indians understood the environment, lived it and loved
it.
Perhaps the most tragic story of all in our decades of environmental exploitation is the story of how we destroyed the land the independence and the way of life of American Indians who preceded us by centuries on this land.

This administration will give special emphasis to improving state services for Indians. My recommendations will be included in the state budget.

Jobs are a major concern for all of us. And there is no need to abuse the environment to protect jobs. In fact, Minnesota history shows that the destruction of our natural resources means the destruction of industries that put people to work.
Our first major industry in what we now call Minnesota was furs. There were more than 150 fur outposts in Minnesota.
In that era, our leaders thought there was no end ever to the fur-bearing animals. They would continue to multiply no matter how many pelts were taken.
Wars were fought over the fur industry. This area, in fact, was colonized because of its fur-bearing animals.
There was no thought of tomorrow, and so those animals were destroyed and, in fact, they're just starting to come back.
Less than a century ago, miles and miles of white pine stretched all the way from southeastern Minnesota to the Canadian border. Thousands were employed as mill hands and lumberjacks in a great timber industry.
Our leaders in the 1880's were convinced there was no end to the white pine industry in Minnesota.
And most of those early lumberjacks were farmers. They harvested crops in the fall, trees in the winter.

Farmers planted crops, but nobody planted trees. Government could have required that one section be replanted as soon as cutting started on another. If that had been the law, we might still have a white pine industry in Minnesota, and majestic white pine trees today.
But no one made them do it. And 67 billion board feet of lumber left Minnesota. So did a major industry, and the jobs that went with it.
Commercial fishing is the same story. That industry in Minnesota, for all practical purposes, is gone--because nobody thought ahead.
When the fish are gone, the jobs are gone. When the trees are gone, the jobs are gone. And when the fur-bearing animals are gone, the jobs are gone.
Minnesota!s natural iron ore took 1.5 billion years to form. In one person's lifetime-~75 years--we mined all the natural ore in Minnesota. Nothing was done to preserve the environment in Northern Minnesota.
Minnesota's natural ore mines employed many more people than we have working now in the taconite industry. When the natural ore was gone, the jobs were gone.
If we had just had Legislative mine-land reclamation, there would be more jobs in Minnesota--jobs that restore and enhance our environment. Those jobs could be with us today.

Page 9
Only one state in the union has done less in mine-land reclamation than Minnesota. This administration intends to improve our standing dramatically.
Today we are witnessing the destruction of another magnificent resource--Lake Superior. For thousands of years the lake was pure. And in less than 20 years we befouled it. It will take 500 to 1,000 years before the asbestiform fibers settle out of the water.
It saddens me to think that 30 years ago we didn't heed the warning of one individual ~ now a Legislator, who spoke out in opposition
to granting a permit to Reserve Mining allowing them to dump taconite tailings into Lake Superior. At this time, 1 want to publicly recognize that individual, representative Willard Munger of Duluth.
And we still have not found a way to stop Reserve Mining from dumping into that lake and preserve the jobs of 3,000 Minnesota human, beings at the same time. We must do that and we will together during this Legislative session.
Lately we have started to do better. And we've been fortunate. We've had a second chance to turn environmental exploitation into environmental, social and economic efforts to develop these great resources. I'm proud of those efforts and I will continue to support them.
We are also facing the terrible effects of drought on our water resources. And they must be preserved and perpetuated.


The first step is to find out what we really have. We must finish the public water inventory of surface waters now underway. And we must start as soon as possible to make a comprehensive inventory of our underground water.
The record has improved in recent years. But most important our attitude is better. We are trying harder to keep what we have left.
We must also try much harder to preserve what we have left of our national energy resources. That means we must stop wasting energy.
Except for peat Minnesota has no natural energy resources at all.
Energy conservation must become a major state goa1 not because it is the proper thing to do, but because it's the only sane thing to duo Our quality of life depends on it.
We have some of the nation'ss pioneer energy conservation measures but they are not enough. This year I will ask the Legislature to approve the farthest-reaching and most comprehensive energy conservation program ever considered by any state.
It won't be an easy program to pass. It will affect a great many people. It will require some difficult changes for all of us. But there is no alternative--except disaster.
My proposals will include a state government energy conservation program to cut out energy use by 10 percent. It will require consideration of alternative energy in any new state buildings.


Conservation can do more than save energy. It can give us the time to develop alternative energy sources.
We must support plans to bring Alaska's oil and natural gas to Minnesota. We must also support the proposed coal use study of Minnesota's Environmental Quality Council.
And I pledge to you today that I will do everything I can to continue the Anderson Administration's effort to bring a new National Solar Energy Institute to Minnesota.
We have an opportunity to become a mode) state in energy conservation and research. I can't imagine a more important goal.
But whatever we do to conserve energy! we are still going to need more of the electrical power it provides.
Because of your good work, we now have state laws that regulate the siting of power plants or power lines in the state. But some of our citizens thing they are unfair.
You already have Governor Anderson's recommendation before you.
And I want to announce today that Speaker Martin Sabo and Majority Leader Nicholas Coleman, Senator Gerald Willet and Representative Willard Munger have agreed to hold joint hearings on power line sitings within the next two weeks. They will be held in the area affected by the UPA-CPA line. Lieutenant Governor Alec Olson will represent me at those meetings and will give the power line conflict priority attention.


We will need more electrical power in Minnesota. We must be sure that we get it the right way.
Our energy and environmental needs require a new commitment of government, industry and the people of Minnesota to form a partnership for the future.
In the long run, our high quality of life depends on our ability to keep a healthy environment, healthy people and a healthy economy.
To do that, we must also have a healthy relationship with the federal government in Washington.
That's why I have assigned Lieutenant Governor Alec Olson to improve state-federal cooperation and coordination.
Vice President Mondale comes from this state. We have two strong senators and real Minnesota leadership in the United States House of Representatives.
They can help us and I know they will, not only to bring more federal dollars to Minnesota, but also to help cities and counties and school districts keep doing a good job for our people.
We can speak for all Minnesota government, state and local, and that is what I'm asking Lieutenant Governor Alec Olson to do.
The state of Minnesota does a good job for its people. We have-identified and assisted those with special needs. We have developed many programs and improved many others. We have invested heavily in opportunity for our people.


We have tried to make state and local government work well and give our people more equal services through fair taxes and fair funding. We have also improved our management of state funds and state budgets. We have been able to. do our work and serve our people without increasing any major state taxes during the past two Legislative sessions.
I hope we will not increase taxes in this session either. We will have enough revenue to keep our state budget balanced for the next two years and that makes us more fortunate than many other states. But there will be no extra money.
The resources provided by our taxpayers are precious. They come from people who work hard for a living. We already ask more from. them than most states do.
It is time for us to enter a new era in Minnesota state government. The time is coming when Governors and Legislators will no longer be judged on the number of their new proposals or their success in passing them. Instead, the test will be our wisdom and skill in making present laws work well for our people.
There will continue to be a need for some new laws and for refinement of the laws we have.
But our highest priorities should be management, responsiveness, cooperation instead of competition--the best possible service at the lowest possible cost.
We must pay as much attention to the quality of our stewardship as we do to the nobility of our purpose. That is what our people want and that is what they deserve from us.


For my part, I do not intend to make promises that we cannot fulfill.
We already have excellent state government leadership, thanks to Governor Anderson, the LEAP Program and this Legislature.
Our financial stability has earned this state government a triple A credit rating, the highest there is.
Because of administrative and organizational reforms, we have better tools than ever before. Now, together, is the time to use those tools.
We do not need more state employees. We do need to get full value for every dollar we spend.
And all of us meet today to celebrate the Minnesota spirit-that people are the strength and purpose of government.
As I see it, I have three tasks before me: 1. To run the Executive Branch honestly, efficiently, openly and compassionately. 2. To cooperate with you, the Legislature, in making sound policy and carrying it out well. 3. Above all, to listen to and talk with, the people.
As I try to do that, my goal will be a government that works hard for people and not for self-preservation. My goal will be a government that responds more imaginatively to the needs and the rights of the people of Minnesota.


The number of women and minority citizens in positions of responsibility is insignificant compared with their contributions to society. I pledge to bring more minorities and women into major policy positions in state government.
I will also work for more participation and involvement of the people who give us their resources and our strengths. Many people have volunteered to help and I know that they can help. They have much to show us and we have much to show the nation by making good use of them. I am determined to do that.
I'm also determined to give individual Minnesota citizens the information and help they need from our state agencies.
This state has pioneered open meetings, but real openness means being willing and prepared to answer the questions of citizens with great respect and greater speed. It also means listening to complaints and suggestions and taking recommendations seriously.
The openness of government to the public is the key to responsive, compassionate and truly effective government.
I approach my new tasks with great enthusiasm for what has been accomplished, and great excitement for what still remains to be done.
I promise today to work untiringly with you to fulfill our Minnesota spirit. lIve worked in this building for a long time and know most of you well. My office and my staff will help you in any way we can.


But I also need your help. I ask for it and I welcome it. And we can all succeed if we work together and live by the words described in a plaque that was presented to me by a center for handicapped people. The plaque reads: None of us is as smart as all of us. 1I
We have been blessed by the land of this state. Our resources have given us productive farms and forests, mines,and other industries.
But our state has not been made great just because of those resources. It is our people who have made those resources productive farmers and forest managers, miners and factory workers, good business people, good legislators and good public officials.
The real resource of this successful society is our people and the Minnesota spirit they have produced.
Have a good session.
Thank you very much.

Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, Mr. Chief Justice, Associate Justices, Members of the 73rd State Legislature, Constitutional Officers, Governors, distinguished friends and fellow Minnesotans:
Let me first say a word of thanks to Governor Quie and his administration for their excellent cooperation during our transition period. The Governor and his staff did everything possible to help us in this hectic period between election and inauguration. Thank you very much, Governor.
I want to welcome Senator Dave Durenberger to these Chamber. He has worked in the office of a past governor and is well aware that our economic recovery will depend on federal -- as well as state actions. We look forward to working with him in establishing a strong state and federal partnership.
***
As the 36th governor of Minnesota, I am today performing my constitutional duty by bringing you a report on the "State of the State."
The state of our state is not good. But we are not here to dwell on problems. Rather, we are here to outline the steps that are needed to find solutions. I have no slogans for this speech -- no new deal, fair deal or square deal. But for those who want a capsule comment on where we are headed, let me suggest that the central goal of our administration will be economic recovery, and the basic method for achieving that goal will be a partnership between government and the people it serves.

I believe that creation of jobs and expansion of employment rests on these broad principles --
We must nurture the startup and growth of small business as the key to the economic and social revitalization of Minnesota. The economic health of our farm economy is vital. We already have the human, financial, technological and natural resources to achieve this revitalization, but these resources are not being utilized to their utmost. The only practical way of tapping these resources is a genuine and broad-based public-private partnership that includes business, government, education, labor, agriculture, churches and all other segments of influence in our society. All of us must head in the same direction. We need more than a quick-fix. We need improved productivity in the workplace. We need quality in education, particularly in languages, math, science and computers. We need a long-range plan to visualize where Minnesota is headed 5, 10 and 20 years down the road. Ladies and gentlemen of the Legislature, that is where we will begin today.
***
Let me talk first about the role of partnership in the process of economic recovery. The economic recovery of Minnesota requires a concerted and cooperative effort. It is the duty of this administration

to propose new solutions to the Legislature. It is the duty of the Legislature to review those ideas, alter or replace them if appropriate, and to enact them into law. It is our duty together to implement these new ideas.
What I am saying is remindful of another inaugural message by Governor Harold Stassen in 1939, when Minnesota was beginning to slowly edge out of the Great Depression. He spoke of cooperation and mutual respect. The words he used then are just as useful now. I quote Governor Stassen:
"It will be my policy in this message, and throughout this session of the Legislature, to respect your prerogative, to recognize the division of powers between the branches of government under the Constitution, and to ask you, frankly, for your help in reaching the objectives of our administration, and in fulfilling the desires of the people."
I intend to keep my list of proposals to you relatively short. I want you to know in advance that we will be concentrating on four key areas: Economic development, energy, agriculture and assistance to the needy.
I urgently request from you a genuine, open debate on these and other public policy issues. Take my proposals and air them fully. Hone them and perfect them. But let all the people of Minnesota see them debated and acted upon.
***
We should also look to others in addition to ourselves for new ideas.
I have been very pleased with the organizations and individuals who have submitted recommendations on ways to initiate our economic recovery. Business groups, organized labor, nonprofit organizations and

higher education have all set forth useful ideas for state initiatives. I urge you to consider them carefully.
I want to call your attention to the work of an individual seated here today. Last year Representative John Brandl published his proposal on "A Fiscal Agenda for Minnesota." He argued for substantial reform in the manner by which public services are delivered and the method used to finance them.
In his words, "The way out of our fiscal swamp is not a mere compromise between spending and taxing, but a bold revamping of the ways we spend and tax."
Representative Brandl's main points are: 1. We must protect those who are needy with basic education,
basic income and basic medical care. 2. We should provide money rather than services to the needy.
Government itself need not produce services if people have money to procure them elsewhere. 3. Institutionalized people should be returned to a normal environment whenever and wherever possible. 4. We should foster self-help rather than dependence on government. 5. We can charge people for public service. If citizens have the money to pay, then charging the cost of a service is an inducement to provide those services economically, and to provide only those services for which people are willing to pay. 6. Service providers, including those in government, should be held accountable.

Each of us could argue the merits of these ideas. But the point is, they are bold new directions. I am convinced that only bold new directions can solve our fiscal crisis, and I urge the Legislature to consider Representative Brandl's proposals as a starting point for this year's deliberations.
***
I have initiated the following steps to provide additional ideas on how best to work toward recovery:
First, within a few days we will be inviting all the former governors of Minnesota to a meeting at the Governor's residence. Each of these individuals is a special person, elected by Minnesotans to meet the particular needs of a particular time. Each has insights on what needs to be done and what can be done.
Second, I plan to establish a regular schedule of breakfast meetings with leaders of agriculture, business, education and labor. Together with government and the people of Minnesota, they will make our new partnership.
Third, last week I announced the appointment of Blue-Ribbon Economic Recovery Commissions in ten key growth sectors of the Minnesota economy. These groups will advise our administration on high technology, medical technology, tourism, agri-processing, wood products, minerals, film and graphic arts, international trade, banking and investment, and construction. I have asked these groups to bring me a fast track report by February 15 on how government can assist these key industries to grow and prosper.

Another special commission will make recommendations on what to do about our state planning functions. More than ever we need the capability to envision the Minnesota of the future.
Fourth, I have asked my staff and the commissioner of Finance to initiate a thorough review of the state budget. The recent special session of the Legislature forced us to delay our final budget planning by about three weeks, and I have asked your permission to submit my budget message on February 15.
***
Government will play a key role in the economic recovery partnership. Over the last three years we have asked state agencies,schools, and local government to absorb a substantial amount of budget cuts.
I would like to be able to tell you that the cutting is over, but I cannot. However, any additional reductions we make must be extremely selective.
We must try to consolidate governmental offices, agencies and institutions. We must also seek new options for providing public services.
State government reorganization is one way to make the delivery of services more efficient and cost-effective. Right now more than 30 agency heads report directly to me. Any good management plan would cut that number by one-half.
To start with, we are recommending a reorganization of the Commerce Department and a transfer of the Consumer Services function to the Office of the Attorney General. In addition, we are considering various options for the departments of Health, Public Welfare and Energy,

Planning and Development. I am also committed"to substantially reducing the number of direct gubernatorial appointments to boards and commissions.
I respectfully request that constitutional offices and the Judicial and Legislative branches undergo the same self-evaluation now underway in the Executive Branch. With respect to the Legislature, I urge you to consider whether 201 individuals are necessary to represent the people of Minnesota. I suggest you consider reducing the size of the Legislature, with the reduction to become effective after the 1990 census.
***
This process of self-evaluation cannot be limited to state government. Schools, cities, counties and towns must accelerate their efforts to streamline their operations.
In my Inaugural Address on Monday, I said I was deeply concerned that past budget cuts in education have fallen far too hard on classroom teachers and not hard enough on the administration of schools. I am concerned that the teaching of languages, math and science is slipping. Minnesota students must be in the forefront of computer knowledge both for their own benefit and for the benefit of Minnesota-based industries, which will need them as workers.
The lack of computer education will intensify the divisions between the haves and have-nots in our society. We cannot allow this to happen.

I intend to speak out repeatedly on the subject of education and repeat my warning that we cannot retreat to a narrow teaching of the three Rs in an age of computers and lasers. We cannot afford to send our students into ~ high tech society with ~ low tech education.
***
How we raise money to finance government also will affect our recovery. It is time to initiate a major reexamination of how we finance the operation of government. As you know so well, for the past three years we have cut budgets and raised taxes repeatedly, and we have been forced into the use of shifts. That must stop.
As Governor, I never used or threatened vetoes. My philosophy is to have an early warning system, letting legislative sponsors know that changes in certain bills would be urged. That system has worked well, and I believe I have a good working relationship with the Legislature.
But let me say here that I will use the veto, if necessary, to avoid further dependence on shifts as a way of balancing the state budget.
Let me say a few words about my philosophy on revenue raising. I will save the details for my February 15 Budget Message, but I want you to know that I will be seeking tax reforms leading to a system that is stable, equitable, and simple.
To help us assure a stable system, we must appropriate a reasonable budget reserve. We will be using conservative estimates in our budget projections. But even so, we must have a budget cushion large enough to protect against unanticipated economic downturns. I will include a specific proposal for a reserve in my Budget Message.

Over two-thirds of what now is called "state spending" does not go for what usually is thought to be "state government." Seventy cents of every dollar spent by the state is returned to schools, local governments or directly to individuals in the form of "transfer payments." It is money collected by the state but channeled directly back to citizens and their cities, counties, towns and schools.
In recent years we have run into trouble because we have promised more in these transfer payments than we have been able to deliver. Local governments have justifiably complained; their budget planning has suffered as a result.
In February I will be proposing to you a system whereby schools and local governments will be asked to share the risk of state revenue collections. If the state revenues fall below our conservative projections, then the governmental recipients of these aid payments should be expected to bear a proportionate reduction in payments.
Without this flexible aid formula for schools and local government, and without a budget reserve, the only alternative is a series of special legislative sessions. No one benefits from special sessions; I am committed to avoiding them.
***
As you know, our credit rating has suffered as we have turned increasingly to short-term borrowing because of cash flow problems. Clearly, that must end. We must join in taking all necessary steps to restore our credit rating to Triple-A and MIG-I.
***

Let me sum up my thoughts on fiscal matters. We must do more than merely cut budgets or raise taxes. We must reexamine both the size and nature of government expenditures. All levels of government must participate in this process, and all levels must share in the risk of economic down cycles. The state can no longer be looked to as the guarantor of aid levels to schools and cities.
***
Reducing the cost of government,' and making government more efficient, will help our economic recovery. But government can also play a positive role; it can be the source of new initiatives and a prime mover in our new partnership.
An example of an opportunity for a positive role for government is reducing the cost of workers' compensation insurance. I am asking you to deal with this issue - and to solve it - in the 1983 session. To help in this effort, we can refer to various studies recently completed.
I am convinced that we can reduce the cost of workers' compensation insurance to the employers of the state without impairing benefits for injured workers. ~By making the system more efficient and more equitable, and building in the proper incentives for both workers and employers, we can remove this barrier to economic recovery.
***
I will soon be sending you a number of additional new initiatives designed to help put Minnesotans back to work and to get our economy moving again. I call my philosophy for these new initiatives "investment budgeting." By that I mean we must concentrate our limited resources in

those sectors of the economy where state assistance can do the most good and where one dollar of state investment will yield many dollars in increased economic activity.
Tourism is an excellent example. I have made a commitment to increase our tourism budget to $6.2 million, about four times its present size. If past patterns hold true, that amount will produce over $100 million in new revenues for Minnesota businesses and workers.
I have asked Marlene Johnson, our new Lieutenant Governor, to spearhead this tourism initiative. I cannot tell you how proud I am to have Marlene. - the first woman Lieutenant Governor in the history of Minnesota - as a partner on our team.
We have other investment opportunities in the state, and I will give you more ideas on those in several weeks.
To fund these investments, we could use direct appropriations, sale of bonds, prudent use of invested funds; we could provide direct loans to businesses, loan guarantees, equity investments or participate in regional venture capital programs.
We'll be looking at dollar-stretching ideas -- leveraging state money to the maximum. We will look for prudent investments in ways that create opportunity and stimulate other investments. On January 24, I will deliver, to you, the investment budget with detailed recommendations.
***
We will not experience a full economic recovery until the depression on our farms has ended. Agriculture and related businesses are the backbone of the Minnesota economy. The current tragedy on our farms affects all of us, rural and city residents alike.

We have taken steps to resolve this problem, and I ask your help in searching for others.
To date, we have appointed a special trade representative for agriculture, we issued an Executive Order on the use of gasohol in state-owned vehicles, we have begun research on the full extent of farm mortgage foreclosures, and we are working with governors in eight nearby states on a minimum pricing bill.
***
Our economic recovery is also dependent on our ability to increase energy conservation programs and to develop alternative energy sources. Our climate and our lack of traditional fossil fuels pose a significant barrier to economic growth.
We must do more to weatherize our public buildings, residences and businesses. We must develop sources of alternative energy like peat, biomass, hydro, solar and wood residues. And we must provide incentives for the expansion of district heating systems.
Because energy is so important to our economic recovery, I will be delivering a separate message to the Legislature on that topic within several weeks.
***
Let me discuss our most pressing and most immediate need providing food, shelter and clothing for those Minnesotans who are out of work, and who have no other sources of support.

For too many Minnesotans, these are truly desperate times. While we speak of economic recovery in the future, they cry out for food and shelter now. Our churches, foundations, businesses, labor unions and individuals are struggling to meet the needs, but more must be done.
As Governor, I am in a unique position to bring together all of our state's major institutions to concentrate on this problem. Already I have instructed our state agencies to evaluate possible initiatives. We are looking into the possibility of using National Guard armories and other state facilities as possible shelters for the homeless this winter.
Even with our best efforts, government needs help to solve this pervasive problem. I am pleased at recent initiatives by the private sector. Within the past week, the McKnight Foundation, in partnership with the cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul, announced a major grant program that will put over 600 Minnesotans to work in the private sector. I extend my deep appreciation to the Foundation and to the mayors of the cities who worked so hard to put that program together.
We Minnesotans who have a job, or some source of income, must do our part to help alleviate the suffering of others. Various communities in the state have begun volunteer programs to help meet the food, clothing and shelter needs of the unemployed. We can learn from these examples.
I am asking every mayor and county commissioner to consider how their community can institute a volunteer program and to work with us in state government and the private sector.
To those of you without jobs, this is my message: I know of your problems; I have been through similar experiences before. Do not give up hope.
I am making a personal and heartfelt commitment to do what I can to help.

***
Two years ago the Legislature limited eligibility for persons on general assistance. Able-bodied persons with marketable skills were denied benefits. At the time this was done, the economy was not in the condition we find it today.
Those who are able and willing to work are having extreme difficulty in finding a job. The Pot1ach Corporation had 130 job openings for a new wood products plant opening March 1st in Cook, Minnesota. They have been accepting applications for two weeks and already had over 8,000 inquiries.
We cannot continue to penalize those persons who are suffering as a result of bad economic conditions. Eligibility for general assistance must be expanded or we must find other ways to help those who have no other sources of assistance available to them.
In the coming weeks I want to harness the compassion, the energy and the ideas of all Minnesotans into the greatest self-help operation this state has ever seen. We are a strong people, and we are a caring people. And we are one people. Together we can get over this recession and plant the seeds for a strong economic future.
***
Much of what I have talked about today has emphasized the need for a partnership between the public and private sectors in Minnesota. I want to stress that point one more time. Churches and nonprofit organizations alone cannot feed the hungry or house the homeless. Business and labor alone cannot turn the economy around. Government alone cannot

restore our crumbling infrastructure. It takes a concerted effort - an effort based on mutual trust and a willingness to compromise.

today.

***
Let me sum up the eight major points I want to leave with you
1. The goal of our administration will be the economic recovery of Minnesota, and to achieve this goal we will rely on a strong partnership between government and the people it serves.
2. We must continue to reduce the cost of government by reevaluating how and why government taxes us and what it does with those tax revenues; we must look to government reorganization and consolidation as another way to reduce cost.
3. We must reform our tax system to make it more stable, more equitable and more simple.
4. We must better manage our state's finances: I will veto any further shifts, we will insist on a reasonable budget reserve, we will use conservative budget estimates, and we will reduce, to the extent possible, our reliance on short-term borrowing.
5. We will reevaluate the fiscal relationships between the state and our schools and local governments; the state can no longer be the guarantor of local finances.
6. We must maintain a forward-looking education system; we cannot afford to send our students into a high tech society with a low tech education.


7. We will do everything possible to create favorable opportunities for business growth in the state; we will recommend "investment budgeting" and we will strive hard for the passage of workers' compensation insurance reform.
8. And finally, we must not forget our duty to those Minnesotans who are out of work and without any sources of support.
I will close with these thoughts - we face a real crisis in the life of our state, because of the number of people out of work, and the problems of state revenues. Yet, I harbor the strong belief that in adversity people can be at their best.
This becomes clear when blizzards strike, like the one of last week. People did not despair, they pitched in and helped each other, and there was a bond that normally does not exist when times are good.
I hope that can happen, for however many months or years it takes, to pull us out of the economic "blizzard" we. are now experiencing.
We have seen this cooperative spirit before. It has been evident in bad times, and we recovered.
Columnist Walter Lippman once put it this way: "You took the good things for granted. Now you must earn them again. It is written: 'For every right that you cherish, you have a duty which you must fulfill. For every hope that you entertain, you have a task you must perform. For every good that you wish could happen .. You will have to sacrifice your comfort and ease. There is nothing for nothing any longer.'"
We have a lot to do. I need your help. Now let's get going! Thank you.
***

Mr. Speaker, mr. President, mr. Chief justice, members of the court, members of the legislature, constitutional officers, former governors and fellow Minnesotans.
It is my duty under the constitution to again report to you on the "state of the state." i want to share with you my perspective of where we have been . My sense of where we are and my vision of where we can go.
I am pleased to say that we can look back on a year of hard work and accomplishment.
The state of our state is much improved today from a year ago.
And i can also say that we can now look ahead with a sense of optimism, of confidence, that was not possible a year ago.
As a result, we can take hold of our destiny once again.
We can restore Minnesota to its place of greatness among our states.
We can shape a Minnesota that works not only for the rest of 1980s but also for the 1990s and beyond.
 


First, let's look back to one year ago.
We were reeling from one special legislative session to another. There were five special legislative sessions in one year prompted by our recurring budget crisis.
You in the legislature were forced to raise taxes and cut service .
We were desperately trying to prevent bankruptcy. One business
columnist was predicting that the state would be bankrupt by november i, 1983.
We were confronted by a massive financial deficit.
Our triple-a credit rating was gone.
Unemployment had gone beyond 10 percent.
The threat of farm foreclosures was running high, and food shelves were running low.
Minnesota - the state that worked - was sputtering.
Our people had lost confidence in their state government.
It was not a happy time for Minnesota.


We took office with no easy slogans, no quick fixes, but we did make one pledge: To make state government work again and to help put Minnesotans back to work, that promise has been kept,
 
when we came into office one year ago, i laid out two immediate goals for Minnesota:
Restore fiscal stability and put our people back to work, i am happy to report that we are doing well on both fronts, our budget is balanced and we paid off more than 500 million dollars in old bills, we are starting to get our good credit ratings back and there is money in the bank,
 


in place of a massive deficit, we have a solid budget reserve.

Minnesota, i'm proud to say, appears to be in the healthiest financial shape of any state in this country.

And i intend to keep it that way.

 

 

This past year in state government can be summed up in three words: Stability, credibility and dependability.

The credit for this impressive turnaround must be shared with the people of Minnesota, and with you, the members of the legislature.

It was your willingness to make the tough decisions last spring that put our fiscal house in order.

It was a team effort, and it worked.

Minnesota's economic recovery is strong, and our people are going back to work.

82,000 more Minnesotans are working today than one year ago.


Our unemployment rate has dropped from 10.4 percent last January to 6.8
percent. That's below the national average.
The job-creating programs, which you approved last session, are working well.
We have put more than 7,200 people to work on the emergency jobs
program.
The confidence of Minnesota business leaders was badly shaken by the fiscal nightmares of the past.
But our determination to provide fiscal stability and our determination to make government work has given renewed confidence to decision-makers in the business world.
 
They now see a state that balances its books that meets problems head on that insists on tough fiscal management.
And they have an administration that listens that cares . And keeps its promises.
 


One of the promises i made a year ago was to nurture a new era of cooperation in Minnesota involving labor, business, education, agriculture and government. I called it a new "partnership."
but lately i have been referring to it as our  Minnesota family" -made up of our diverse ethnic and economic groups -- a family whose members help each other through the tough times.
That idea -- whether you call it partnership or family -- is vital to the long-range economic health of our state.
We must build bridges -- not dig chasms -- between the segments of our society.
One of my first actions as governor was to appoint economic recovery commissions, bi-partisan in membership and chaired by some of Minnesota's more prominent citizens.
These volunteer commissions worked rapidly to produce recommendations . I accepted their recommendations and you enacted many of them into law.
The results have been impressive. From wood products to tourism to technology, we are seeing the benefits of this new spirit of cooperation.


Let me cite some of year's headlines:
Ford motor company announced a 250 million dollar expansions in st. Paul, one of the largest industrial expansions anywhere in the country.
Apache corporation decided to stay in Minnesota and expand.
IBM, one of our major employers, outlined a long-term growth program.
Eta systems selected st. Paul as its headquarters, assuring that Minnesota will be the super-computer of the world.
Louisiana pacific picked Minnesota over several other states for a new wood products plant.
Prudential announced plans to move a major division to Minneapolis,
adding some 1300 jobs.
H.B. Fuller company dedicated a 12 million dollar research and development center in vadnais heights .
And honeywell announced phase one of a three-part 43 million dollar
building expansion.
Whether it's sanborn manufacturing expanding in springfield .


I.D.A. Corporation growing in moorhead or the biosorb company moving from north dakota to Minnesota . The story is the same, wherever i go: Minnesota workers are among the most productive in the country. Let me give you a few more examples, watlow electric company has plants in illinois, iowa and west germany. They could have expanded in any of those places. Bur they chose to add hundreds of jobs in winona because of the quality of the workforce. Executives of ford motor company told me the same thing , so did thin film technologies of north mankato . And so did star technologies when they opened a research facility in brooklyn park.
 There are just a few examples, but they tell an important story: Minnesota has turned the corner and is on the move.


We have made a big start toward the major long-range goal of this administration:
To make Minnesota the best place to live work play . And .. The best place to do business.
 
But we cannot stop here. Our agenda remains full. And it will require more bridge-building . More pulling together as a Minnesota family.
Our first and foremost objective is to make Minnesota competitive with the rest of the country.
Some of our state taxes are too high and must be reduced. Our citizens are willing to pay for quality service, but they are paying too much today.
That's why my top priority for the 1984 legislative session is to cut taxes. I am proposing five immediate tax changes.
First, repeal of the 10 percent income surtax on july 1st. This will
put 230 million dollars into the pockets of Minnesota taxpayers over the
next 18 months.


Second, transfer of the motor vehicle excise tax into the highway construction fund, retroactive to last july 1st. This will pump an
additional 93 million dollars into highway construction and transit,
improving our transportation systems and putting people to work. It keeps a promise already made.
Third, repeal of the unitary tax on corporations, helping Minnesota firms in the world marketplace.
Fourth, adoption of several incentives to encourage our businesses to enter world markets. This will cost us little, but will send an important signal.
Fifth, repeal of the state's share of the estate tax. Easing the burden on our senior citizens, and encouraging our retired citizens to stay in Minnesota.
These changes are necessary and urgent to keep our economic momentum.
These reductions will set the steps for further and more comprehensive tax reform recommendations from the latimer tax study commission, which i appointed last year.


This bi-partisan commission will conduct a top-to-bottom review of our
tax structure, and make recommendations to the 1985 legislature. It will be the most thorough analysis of tax policy in 30 years, and it will position
Minnesota for economic leadership for generations to come.
Beyond these immediate tax-reducing proposals, my legislative program will be brief and to the point.
The most important objective will be to hold spending to an absolute minimum.
We have worked hard to put Minnesota back on its feet financially .
As part of our effort to make Minnesota a competitive leader in this country, we must continually re-examine our structure. We must prune reorganize and streamline. Our goal must always be to eliminate red tape and fat.
However, i must also point out that the number of non-faculty employees
on the state payroll has declined over the past 10 years. State employees
are doing a good job -- anyone who drives on clear highways within hours after a blizzard can testify to that.


As a means of prompting an on-going review of state government, i am
recommending that reforms be made in all three branches -- executive, legislative and judicial.
First, a citizen commission will report soon on some options relating to constitutional offices. Several elected officials have proposed such a review, and i believe the time is right for a constitutional amendment to be considered.
Second, i again strongly recommend that the legislature make a serious attempt to agree on a reduction in size. While i am not firmly committed to
a particular number, a house of 100 members and a senate of 50 seems to make
sense. If this change can be enacted, it should be written to take effect
for the 1992 elections, following the next census.
Third, a commission created by this legislature has recommended
unification of our county and district courts. I have appointed all 12
members of our new court of appeals, and that court has plunged into its work. It is time to have a court system of three levels -- no more.


These immediate actions:

Tax reduction, spending restraint, and reducing the size of government
will send a clear signal that Minnesota can respond positively and
aggressively to the needs of the 1980s and prepare itself for the 1990s.

 

 

One of the most difficult -- yet important -- problems you will face this session is revision of our unemployment compensation program.

In the past, we chose to borrow from the federal government rather than adopt a pay-as-you-go system. That is another overdue bill which must be paid.

Yet, business -- particularly small business -- needs relief. But we
cannot turn our backs on the unemployed worker who wants to work but cannot find a job.


A special commission with representation from both labor and management
is hard at work on this issue, and is making progress. This issue is too important to the workers and businesses of this state to become a political football. Here again, let us think of building bridges -- let us work together to find a permanent solution.
This issue -- and many of the issues we will deal with -- affect the small businesses of Minnesota. Most of them don't have public relations firms, and don't make flashy announcements when they open or expand. But
they provide 80 percent of the new jobs in Minnesota each year -- and their
voice must be heard.
 
This session of the legislature should be short and limited in scope.
You have my pledge of support to complete the session in six or seven weeks.
As always, i am always available to meet with members of the
legislature to facilitate the work of the 1984 session.
 
Here in Minnesota, i see 1984 as a turning point. We are poised to
move in new directions.


Thanks to the foresight of our leaders and the sacrifice of our citizens we have a fine education system 
Minnesota is known throughout the world for high technology 
we hold a pre-eminent position in medicine and health carel medical technology and tele-communications 
few other states can claim a stronger agricultural base, , ,
our record of nurturing small businesses is a strong one ,
and no other state has taken better care of its infrastructure i environment and quality of life.
 
So it's clear that the ingredients are all there for Minnesota to lead and profit from the economic revolution that's sweeping america.
We must inventory our strengths and capitalize on them , ,
we must identify our weaknesses and correct them 
and above all we must have the courage and foresight to turn from the past and embrace the future, we cannot afford the luxury of looking only to
next month or next year, we must anticipate and plan for 1990 and beyond,


in the next few weeks, 11 members of my administration will be reporting in detail on long-range plans for Minnesota. I want these speeches and messages to be viewed as follow-ups to this "state of the state" message.
They will cover education, the environment, regulation and de-regulation and a variety of other subjects. I hope you will find this system a useful departure from the past.
In the few minutes remaining i would like to underscore some of the highlights . .
Pivotal to our future is the overhaul and modernization of our tax structure -- and the streamlining of government -- to give Minnesota the competitive edge in this country. We have taken steps to reduce the cost of workers compensation and we will act to reduce other costs of doing business.
Minnesota will be a state that means business.
 
Education is the flagship of our future


we must view education in global terms . With particular emphasis on mathematics, science, languages and technology.
We must encourage the work of our gifted and talented young people.
And, we must support our colleges and universities in their efforts to expand partnerships with business and industry.
This demands investments in education priorities at all levels.
Many commissions -- both in government and in the private sector -- are studying our educational system. This is good.
We must always look to retaining traditional values in education, but we cannot be afraid to discard old methods when new ones are better.
We must look to new generations of computers and other technologies, but we also must look to new emphasis on arts, music and foreign languages in our schools.
We must soften the hard edges of technology with the songs, poetry and literature of the ages.


Nothing will enhance the future strength of this state more than energy self-sufficiency -- a priority that i have repeatedly stressed for this
administration. We are currently paying over 7 billion dollars a year for our energy needs. And more than half of this 7 billion dollars is leaving
our state to enrich other parts of the world.
That's why we must develop our state's own energy resources. We must keep our energy dollars . And the jobs they provide . At home in Minnesota.
 
Minnesota is now positioned to move aggressively into international marketing.
Many of the great multi-national corporations are headquartered here . .
We have a first-class trade office . .
And the development of the world trade center will make Minnesota the hub of international activity in the midwest.
To solidify our leadership position, i would like to see a graduate school of international business added to one of our colleges or universities.
 


One of the great tragedies of our time is that the ability of american farmers to produce is turned into surpluses . Rather than food for the hungry.
Despite modest increases in grain prices, we still have hard times -perhaps even a depression -- in our farm economy.
That is not something to be shunted aside, because agriculture accounts for 40 percent of Minnesota's economy.
Our goal is to work with farm leaders and the agri-processing industry
to open new markets in 1984. We can add value to farm products by
processing them in Minnesota.
We need better promotion -- Minnesota potatoes need not take a back seat to those from idaho. Minnesota cheese matches that made in wisconsin. Our apples are as tasty as those grown in washington.
Our agriculture department has begun a  Minnesota grown" promotion effort, and i endorse it fully.
 
No state has done a better job of protecting its environment and that effort was recognized a few weeks ago.


A four-year study by the conservation foundation ranked Minnesota first among the 50 states in efforts to protect the environment. That's a ranking we don't want to lose.
Just as important -- the study found that a state does not have to weaken its environmental regulations to attract jobs and industry.
That vigilance will continue.
We can get rid of mountains of old tires, old railroad ties, auto junkyards, solid waste dumps -- and anything else that is a blight on our environment.
We will scrub Minnesota clean.
We must launch a major program to upgrade sewage treatment plants throughout Minnesota. Along with protecting our waters, a strong wastewater treatment system is necessary for industrial expansion.
One of the follow-up messages will deal with our efforts to combat acid rain, Minnesota should be a leader in this effort. We recognized the problem early, and we brought it to national attention.
I intend to make acid rain a major and continuing topic in the national governors' association.
 


Thanks to your courageous votes last session, we have already begun the long process of rebuilding and repairing Minnesota's critical road, highway and bridge network.
Even while that is underway, we should develop a light rail transit system in the metropolitan area to remove some traffic from our increasingly crowded streets and freeways.
 
Minnesota stands to gain more from tourism than most states . .
And thanks to actions of this legislature, we now have a greatly expanded promotion program underway. Inquiries to our tourism office are up by more than 25 percent.
1983 was a good year for our resort and hospitality industry, and 1984 should be even better.
Let me interject at this point a suggestion that we deal with several gaming issues this year -- and put them behind us. Questions of a lottery, greyhound racing and expanded bingo are public policy issues that deserve open, public debate. But they need not consume our interest for year after year.
 


Sports and the arts are not only good for the body and spirit, , , they are good for the state's economy.
We must do more to build private and public support for the arts , .
And we are going all-out to promote a successful, comprehensive sports program with the best major league and college teams in the country. Minnesota deserves the best.
I plan to appoint another citizens commission to study how we may better nurture the arts in Minnesota.
Our music, art and literature can link us to foreign lands.
As i told the Minnesota education association last winter, we live in a world with a multiplicity of languages, many religions and different forms of government. Art is the common denominator, the universal language.
 
In this time of changing priorities and austere budgets . .
We should not, and we shall not, ..
Abandon our commitment to those who need help the most . ,


the handicapped . The elderly .. The poor and the unemployed minorities who are victims of discrimination and women who are underpaid solely because they are women.
Minnesota's compassion for those in need will be maintained.
 
Minnesota's future will be greatly enhanced by our ability to forge strong working relationships with other states, particularly those in the midwest.
For that reason, i have accepted assignments as chairman of the midwest governors' conference, and as a member of the executive committee of the national governors' association.
Tomorrow we open the second session of the Minnesota-wisconsin dialogue to discuss joint efforts in pollution control, acid rain, international trade, education and resource development.
We will soon undertake similar discussions with south dakota and iowa.
And later this week, we host a meeting of the northeastern and midwestern states on the subject of energy.
 


In closing, i want to thank the legislature and the people of Minnesota for helping to turn the state around and put it firmly on course.
Minnesota is on the move . .
Strategically poised in the leadership position as the nation's economic transformation accelerates.
Our goal is to make this state the best place in the country to live and work and play and do business.
We have made great progress, but we have much more work ahead.
There are far too many Minnesotans who want a job and cannot find one.
Our tax burden is too high and must be reduced.
Our educational system, the heart of our future, must be improved.
We must make government work more efficiently and at lower cost for the benefit of our citizens.


He face some very important challenges for 1984. But i want us to look
even farther ahead than that. As i learned during my recent years in
business, you can't judge results in a few months or even a year. We have
to look to the kind of Minnesota we want for the rest of the 1980s and for
the decades which lie beyond. This is my goal:
To position Minnesota for greatness in a rapidly changing world. It is why i have placed much emphasis on my own personal travel and upon international trade.
I see it as the future, and we must capitalize on that future.
I am convinced that Minnesota can become one of the great centers of culture and commerce, of education and opportunity, of sports and recreation . A mecca where citizens from all backgrounds and all pursuits can live and work effectively together . Beacon of success and opportunity for the nation and the world.
This is a great challenge and a worthy goal.
I invite you to join with me in striving toward it.
Thank you.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, Mr. Chief Justice, members of the court, constitutional officers, members of the Legislature and my fellow Minnesotans.
Two years ago I began this address by stating that the central goal of this administration would be job creation and economic recovery, achieved through a partnership between the public and private sectors.
I am pleased to report to you that we have made giant strides toward this goal. The state of the state is greatly improved and getting better.
Two years ago Minnesota's unemployment rate stood at an all-time high.
216,000 of our people were out of work.
The Legislature had staggered through six special sessions, raising taxes, shifting spending and cutting services.
Minnesota's valued triple-A credit rating had been lost, and another deficit was looming on the horizon.
Our state faced the most severe financial crisis in its history.
 
In contrast today...

***

There are more than 170,000 additional Minnesotans employed.

In fact, there are 57,800 more people working now than ever before in the history of our state. For the year ending in October, Minnesota ranked second nationally in total employment gains.

Our state's bank account is in the black instead of the
red . . .

We are re-gaining our top credit ratings

We have a surplus in place of a deficit

And this month we shall payoff our last outstanding loan.

The turn-around has been one of the most dramatic and impressive in the nation.

***
In the past two years, we joined together a family unified by stress and we found our way.

 
We've helped each other we've reached out with

compassion to those in need

and we've restored

confidence and pride in our great state.

To each of you who helped during these difficult days thank you from the bottom of my heart.

I am grateful for your assistance, I am proud of your effort, and I am honored to be your Governor.

Special thanks go to you, the members of the legislature, for helping us make the difficult but necessary decisions.

New leaders have been chosen for this session of the Legislature, and I look forward to working with you.

For the first time in our state's history, a woman

Connie Levi

is the majority leader of the House of

Representatives in Minnesota. I congratulate you, Connie,

and I wish you well.

***
Now we turn our attention to the future, determined to build Minnesota to a position of strength in 1985 and the years ahead.

 
The challenge for the 1980s and 90s is to achieve vigorous, sustainable economic growth in rapidly changing times.
And I'm convinced that the state which will lead the nation is the one that best develops and harnesses the talents, energies and ingenuity of its people.
Minnesota has a natural advantage with well-educated, productive people. We must capitalize on our strengths.
The key to Minnesota's success lies in our ability to adapt this state to a nation and world of profound change. We must embrace change, and shape it, to meet tomorrow on our terms.
If we prepare for change. Minnesota will do well. Minnesota will do well because knowledge will be the steel of this post-industrial economy. Minnesota has the potential to become the number one brainpower state in the nation.
And believe me, we will be the brainpower state in the nation.
 
The path to permanent prosperity in Minnesota will require bold leadership and courageous legislative action to make our state more productive and competitive.

We must move decisively on four major fronts.

First we must reduce personal income taxes and simplify our tax forms.

Second we must control spending and guarantee fiscal stability.

Third we must strengthen our educational system.

Fourth we must accelerate our efforts in economic development and international trade.

All of these actions are aimed at one main strategy;

To create jobs quality jobs Minnesotans, now and in the future.

for all

***
Our first priority our first action must be a major reduction in personal income taxes.

 
My plan will save Minnesotans 604 million dollars, and will drop our maximum tax rate from sixteen percent to nine-point-nine percent.
For a family of four with one wage earner making 15,000 dollars a year Minnesota now ranks number one among all 50 states.
This tax cut will drop us to number 18 in that category. That makes me very happy I'm sure it does you too.
And for the first time in many years, Minnesota will no longer rank number one in any personal income tax category.
Were it not for the severe economic hardship in parts of Minnesota, we could make significantly larger tax reductions. However, we will not turn our backs on the thousands of Minnesotans who desperately need our help.
***
Along with this major tax cut, we must drastically simplify our tax forms.
I don't have to remind you what a hassle it is each year to fill out this tax form.
 
It's three pages long contains 32 pages of instructions and requires you to fill in over 100 spaces. It's a taxpayer's nightmare to say the least.
Under our plan you will have a simple one-page form.
It will haver only 16 lines, and it should take most of us less than 15 minutes to complete the form.
Minnesotans want, need and deserve tax reduction and simplification.
So I am appealing to the legislature to to make this tax reduction retroactive to January first of this year.
***
Our second major priority is spending control and fiscal stability. Stability means a strong state savings account, a budget reserve, a rainy day fund.
It goes by many names, but it means one thing -- an insurance policy against bad times, a guarantee that Minnesota will never again go through the financial chaos of a few years ago.
 
The reserve should be increased to 500 million dollars. I have a surprise for you. We have the money in the bank already. Just don't spend it.
An adequate reserve means we can pay our bills, make payments to local governments on time, and regain our triple-A credit rating.
Having a budgeted reserve is good, sound business practice and I am determined to get it enacted.
****
A strong budget reserve must be coupled with controls on state spending. Our budget team, under the direction of Finance Commissioner Donhowe, has spent nearly six months analyzing every conceivable way to cut the growth of government spending.
Thanks to their work, the budget which I will submit holds average spending increases to less than six percent a year, the smallest percentage increase in state spending in 20 years.
I can assure you that this budget contains only the most essential elements to provide quality services to our people.
 
I am determined to give Minnesota a national reputation for excellent fiscal management. My department heads will be judged by their ability to reduce spending and streamline state government. Our over-riding objective shall be to deliver quality services to the people of Minnesota as efficiently as possible.

We have proven that government can be lean without being mean.

It is my hope that by the time I leave the Office of

Governor, our state will be run with such efficiency

and such foresight

 that stockholders throughout the

United States will ask "Why can't business be run like

government in Minnesota."

On this issue, the federal government should take lessons from Minnesota.

Had Washington operated like Minnesota for the past two years, the federal government might be operating in the black instead of the red.

Unfortunately Washington doesn't have the discipline or ability to control spending.

 
The federal deficit is retarding the economic vitality of this country, and it must be brought under control.
I am announcing my support of a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced federal budget.
This is a dramatic step, but it must be taken.
Minnesota and other states are required to balance their budgets and I ask you, why not the federal government?
****
Positioning Minnesota for a dynamic future also requires investment. Investment to stimulate growth and create jobs investment in economic development and international trade.
There's a line from the broadway play liThe Music Man" about a traveling salesman. "You've got to know the territory."
Our territory in 1985 and beyond will be the world -- not just Minnesota, not just the Midwest, not just America -- but the world.
If you are a teacher you will be teaching more about other countries.
 
If you are a business person you will be learning more about exporting.

If you are a worker you will be looking at how your counterpart in another country does the job.

If you are a parent you will see your children

traveling more, 

learning more languages and

working in different parts of the world.

You will see that your children have opportunities which you and your parents never dreamed were possible.

Our state government must move forward with the rest of the world.

We must know the territory.

Where would the Japanese be today if they had stayed home?

Or more importantly, where would our steel industry be today if American steel executives -- rather than remaining complacent -- had decided to get to know the territory and make the world their marketplace?

We, not the Japanese, should be controlling the world steel markets.

 
Japan is not rich in natural resources. It imports

99 percent of its iron ore. 80 percent of its coal

 99 percent of its oil

 60 percent of its timber

and about one third of its food.

Yet, each year it records trade surpluses in the billions of dollars.

Japan is a world leader in consumer electronics, watches, motorcycles, cameras, automobiles and steel production.

Japan has succeeded because it strived in every way to become competitive. It developed and utilized technology. and then it headed around the world to sell its products and make investments.

We in Minnesota are following Japan's example. opening a bigger market for Minnesota's products, services and technologies.

It makes sense for us to do this because, Foreign trade is the wave of the future, and Minnesota must be ahead of the rest of the country. We must prepare now for the time when the value of the dollar is more realistic, and American products will once again be competitive in world markets.

 
International trade means expanded business for Minnesota, and business expansion, of course, means more jobs for Minnesota workers.
I will travel and continue to travel to any community in this state, any city in this nation, any corner of the world to bring jobs to Minnesota.
We must remember that Minnesota works best when its people are at work.
****
Jobs for tomorrow depend upon education and training today, which is our other major priority to position Minnesota for the future.
Education is the fuel that drives the engine of economic growth and job creation in America's modern society.
Minnesota has a head start here thanks to the long-standing support of public and private education by our people.
Our education system at all levels is one of the best in the country. But we must and we shall .. do better.
 
Last week I announced a bold, new plan for elementary and secondary education. A plan for access to excellence. This is a plan which ensures that all Minnesotans can participate in determining the highest quality of education for our young people.
Access to excellence will clarify the role of the state strengthen local control increase the
productivity of our students and allow parents and students to make decisions about the quality of education.
This is a plan which allows our young people to realize their full potential and to enjoy the brightest future possible.
In less than three weeks, I will submit a budget which significantly increases support to our post-secondary schools. About one-fifth of our budget will be invested in post-secondary education.
We need a strong vocational-technical system to support the workforce needs of our businesses.
We need a strong community college system to provide life-long learning opportunities for all citizens.
 
We need a strong state university system to educate our young people and to serve the economic development of our regions.
And we need a university which is strong, and world renowned for its graduate programs and research. We have a choice. We can be mediocre or we can be the best. I am sure that we in Minnesota want the best.
I want all Minnesotans to have access to the highest-quality education.
Education for me and many of my generation was a passport out of poverty.
Education for my children and yours will be a passport to prosperity.
Minnesota will become known throughout America and the world as the brainpower state.
Our brainpower will fuel the information-based and technology-based industries already flourishing in our state. It will give rise to new enterprises new ideas and new technologies which can be marketed around the world.

****
These major legislative actions will sustain our momentum and position Minnesota for a strong future.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. President . I view this 1985 session not only as the midpoint of the 1980s, but literally as the turning point for our state.
***
While I am pleased by the progress we have made and while I see many signs for optimism . . I am greatly disturbed by what I see happening in much of rural Minnesota.
It is increasingly apparent that Minnesota is becoming a two-economy state, with prosperity in the metropolitan area and depression in many rural parts of Minnesota.
Although there are now 57,800 more Minnesotans working than ever before in our state's history . . that is no consolation to the steel workers on the Iron Range, to the wood workers in International Falls, to the implement dealers in Dawson or the farmers in Fairmont.
The farm crisis and the severe problems of structural unemployment will require a massive, bipartisan effort that
 
includes a major commitment from Washington. The problem goes far beyond our control. The state can help and we will . . but our Senators and Congressmen must work with us. As a nation pulls together in time of crisis, our state must pUll together in this time of economic disaster in rural Minnesota.
I want to work with all of you in developing permanent, long-term solutions for our economically depressed areas.
To those people .hard-working people whose lives are being devastated .to all who may feel this despair
 let me say that I know from personal experience the heartache you are going through.
I can remember my days growing up in Carson Lake a small mining town on the Iron Range. When my father's lunch box was on the shelf, it meant no work, no income for our family.
I know what it's like to need a job and not have one. I know what it's like to face the loss of home and community, since my hometown of Carson Lake is gone forever.
I want you to know that I will not rest in my efforts until all Minnesotans share in our improving economy.
 
I want you to know, also, that I am committed to making

Minnesota benefit, not suffer, 

from the changes

that are sweeping America and the world.

Resisting change is a losing battle. Shaping change is the real challenge. And accepting change can mean new opportunities.

Many times in my own life I have learned this lesson.

When I was five years old . . . a first generation

American who couldn't speak English,

dedicated

teachers taught me the English language and opened a window

on the world.

Many years later, I suffered the deep personal disappointment that follows a political defeat.

You could not have convinced me that any good could come

from that. But,

in fact, it was a bright, new

beginning.

Again, the world opened up. I learned much more about business, international trade, the arts, the cultures of other people. And I developed a closer bond with my own family.

 
I returned to the Office of the Governor with a new perspective a broader view a clearer vision of what Minnesota can be.

And I entered the job with a new enthusiasm for the state and the people I love.

It's an enthusiasm I believe that flows from a special Minnesota spirit.

A spirit that we saw this holiday season when empty food shelves were filled to overflowing once the call for help went out.

It's a spirit that captures the attention of national observers such as Neil Peirce who, in his Book Of America: Inside The 50 States, he said:

"Search America from sea to sea and you will not find as close a model to the ideal of the successful society as Minnesota."

As we look ahead to the 21st century, just 15

years away

 it occurs to me that we are all immigrants

sailing to a new land.

The technological language and culture of tomorrow are unknown to us today. But I am hopeful as I was when I


first began to learn English as a second language that our voyage into the future will be successful.

By nurturing our sense of family by continuing

our spirit of cooperation by adopting common goals 

by preparing for change

 we can reach our goal.

We can make Minnesota productive and competitive . . and meet the future on our own terms.

Thank you very much.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, Mr. Chief Justice, Members of the Court, Constitutional Officers, Members of the Legislature, former governors and my fellow Minnesotans.
I can report tonight that the state of our state is sound.
We have overcome major adversities, we are meeting remaining problems boldly, and we are placing Minnesota squarely on course for a stable and prosperous future.
Minnesota is a remarkable state. Minnesotans are exceptional people. And I am deeply grateful and honored for the opportunity to serve longer than any other governor in the history of this state.
The hurdles ahead are great. But the opportunities are even greater. And the special Minnesota spirit is poised for the challenges we face together.
Our objective in the next four years is to bring out the best in Minnesotans to ensure opportunity for our children.
The five-year-olds who enter kindergarten next fall will graduate from high school in the year 2000. We must be sure that all of them have quality job opportunities.
Our goal is to make Minnesota a model state, to make Minnesota the brainpower state, to make Minnesota a world renowned research center.
To meet these objectives, we must focus our efforts in three key areas.
We must have a tax system that is competitive, honest, fair and simple, an education system that is committed to excellence, and a climate of research that will yield the products, ideas and jobs of the future.
Our future extends beyond terms of public office.
We must use our terms of office to shape our vision for the Minnesota of the 21st century.
It was 24 years ago this week that I first took the oath of office as a state senator and began my service to the state of Minnesota. Only one other individual who was here then, still serves today -- Representative Willard Munger -- Mr. Environment.
Representative Munger and I know how long the debate on Minnesota's business climate has raged.

For more than a quarter of a century, we have heard that Minnesota taxes are too high, and that the Minnesota business climate is bad.
I remember well three years ago when I met with a group of Norwegian business executives in Oslo who spoke at some length in negative terms about our business climate, and the perception of Minnesota as a high-tax state has hampered our ability to attract and create more much-needed jobs.
When I took office as governor in 1983, Minnesotans paid more income taxes than citizens of almost every other state.
We took dramatic action over the past four years, including a 25 percent cut in our income taxes, the largest cut of any state in the union.
But more must be done. We must harness the momentum of federal tax reform to initiate a major overhaul of our entire tax system.
This year we will propose the most sweeping reform in the history of this state.
Our tax plan will be the fairest and most thoughtful of any state in the nation this year.
First we will respond to the new federal law by returning the entire state windfall to the taxpayers of Minnesota.
In addition, 125,000 Minnesota low income families will no lo~ger have any state tax liability.
We will also streamline our tax forms.
Our short form will have only five lines. In fact, most people can do it in less than five minutes.
And our long form will be a single page.
Two-thirds of all taxpayers will be able to use the short form.
We will achieve a dramatic reduction in income tax rates.
When I took office in 1983, our top rate on the income tax was nearly 18 percent.
Under our new plan, we will cut that top rate by more than one-half to 8 percent, and we will also have a 6 percent rate for lower incomes.
Our personal income tax will be the fairest and most thoughtful of any state in the nation.

We will apply the same philosophy to our corporate tax.
I am particularly excited about our plan for property taxes and local government aids.
We will greatly simplify our system, which is now the most complicated in the nation.
We will reduce the number of property tax classifications from 68 to 6.
A key element of our program will be to increase the share of state funding for education, which is the cornerstone of our plan for the future.
I propose that the state assume a substantial share of school costs which are now paid for by property taxes.
Our property tax plan, like our income tax plan, will be the fairest and most thoughtful in the nation.
We will apply the same principles of fairness and thoughtfulness to sales tax reform, without taxing food, clothing, services or prescription drugs.
Overall our tax program has several themes: rate reduction, simplification, and fairness.
No longer will Minnesota tax rates be in the top ten in any major tax categories.
I want to repeat that no longer will Minnesota tax rates be in the top ten in any major tax categories.
We will create a better environment for job growth. And from this day forward we will focus all of our energy and ideas on making life better for those who need help most: our beleaguered farmers, our dislocated miners, and the jobless in our cities.
It is a long-standing and unique Minnesota tradition to form partnerships for the benefit of all.
Most recently we saw this Minnesota spirit in a group of people who reached a remarkable consensus on reform of our schools.
The Governor's Discussion Group brought together people with diverse points of view, but a common goal of making ed~cation in Minnesota the best.
This group understood the importance of making Minnesota the brainpower state, and that brainpower is the wellspring of future economic growth.

We will draw from the group's recommendations to make our K-12 education system the best in this nation.
In higher education, we will continue progress toward making' the University of Minnesota a world-class university, one of the top five universities in the nation.
In January 1985, we asked university officials to focus their mission, and they answered with an excellent plan.
The state, in turn, responded with increased funds for faculty salaries, research and financial aid for students.
It is critical that we continue to support the University's efforts as we did in 1985.
The state university system also has moved to clarify its role, and will become the major provider of undergraduate education.
Our state universities will increasingly become regional economic development centers in greater Minnesota, serving as catalysts for long-term economic growth and vitality.
Our community colleges and our AVTI system have more clearly defined their strengths through recent mission statements.
Graduating from a Minnesota AVTI has proven to be a sure-fire way to a job.
In the future, our AVTIs will play an increasingly important role in creating a better future for the working poor, for victims of major economic declines, and for many Minnesotans who seek training and retraining to provide for their families in the years to corne.
The AVTIs in Minnesota are the best in the nation. I am very very proud of them, and I wish each and everyone of you would applaud that system.
Excellent education will pave the way out of adversity for the most dependent Minnesotans.
This will represent real welfare reform.
I am asking the 1987 Legislature to join with me in establishing a goal that I believe is vital to our future as a state.
By the year 2000, I propose that 50 percent of the workforce in Minnesota will have an education two years beyond high school, and that 35 percent will have completed at least four years of college.

Minnesota already has the best high school completion rate of any state, and I propose we set the same goal for higher education.
Our third key area of emphasis must be research, research which will provide the tools of the future and the jobs of tomorrow.
Research and development leading to job creation will offer the best hope for areas of our. state which have been devastated by the changing economics of a nation and world.
The centerpiece of our research and development enterprise will be the Greater Minnesota Corporation, a public private organization that will spearhead the long-term economic recovery of rural Minnesota.
The Greater Minnesota Corporation will work hand-in-hand with colleges and universities throughout the state to translate research into business development and job creation.
Research will be the catalyst for economic diversification in the future as it has been in the past.
Taconite mining research conducted by Dr. Edward Davis over three decades at the University of Minnesota paved the way in the 1950s for a whole new industry for the Iron Range.
In the early 1900s, experiments in manufacturing sandpaper were conducted by a small company in Two Harbors, Minnesota.
This was the beginning of 3M, today a multinational corporation which makes more than forty thousand products and is our state's largest industrial employer.
3M's unrelenting commitment to research has spawned job opportunities throughout Minnesota and throughout the world.
Many new jobs have resulted from major medical advancements that occurred here in Minnesota.
Medtronic and its pacemaker -- which has provided a new lease on life for people throughout the world -- took shape in Earl Bakken's garage about forty years ago.
Advanced surgical techniques and devices to aid the hearing impaired are other examples of research-driven developments that have improved human life and have created new jobs.
Today, state government is in partnership with the University of Minnesota and private business interests to encourage more breakthroughs that will result in new jobs.
Together, we have established the Technology Corridor, the Supercomputer Institute and of course, the biotechnology center.
We have also invested in applied research efforts at Southwest State University to improve the economy of that region.

With all of our accomplishments in research and development, Minnesota must continue to invest in these activities or we will fall behind.
In the year 2000 Minnesotans will live in an economy rich with new ideas, new products and new jobs.
Minnesota will become a world-renowned research center.
Minnesotans have the abilities to meet these goals.
It has been proven time and again that prosperity does not depend on geographic size, location or climate. Nor does it rely on an abundance of energy fuels or other natural resources.
The key is people, our most important resource.
On opposite sides of the world, we have examples of two small nations, Finland and Japan, where people have made a difference.
Finland is similar to Minnesota in climate, its lack of energy resources and its distance from major economic hubs.
Yet this small nation has the 11th best per capita income in the world. It hasn't had a major economic recession since the end of World War II.
Japan is smaller in geographic size than four of our states, has half of the population of the United States, and virtually no petroleum, iron ore, coal or other mineral resources.
Nevertheless, Japan each year has trade surpluses in the billions of dollars, while the exports of much larger nations lag behind.
Minnesota is the only northern state from Pennsylvania to the west coast that experienced economic growth in the past four years.
Japan, Finland, and Minnesota all are places where industrious people made the difference.
So in closing tonight, I want to cite one illustration of the immense human resources of our state.
During the recent around-the-world flight of the Voyager, there were numerous references made to an earlier aviation feat.
Sixty years ago this May, Charles Lindbergh--whose character was forged in a small Minnesota town---stretched the horizons of human achievement in space, when his plane touched down in Paris after a 33-hour flight across the Atlantic.
Charles Lindbergh exemplified the loneliness of leadership, the daring of discovery, and best of the human
it.

He called his plane "The Spirit of St. Louis," but his heart beat with the spirit of Minnesota.
Minnesotans have led journeys of discovery, journeys of learning, and journeys of love.
Minnesotans have proven to be thinkers, leaders, creators and doers.
Let us continue to think, to lead, to create, and to do.
Along with you, I love this state, and I love its people.
Tonight we stand, side by side, as a family on the threshold of the 21st century. We are challenged by those who have blazed the trail before us. This is the pioneering leadership which is the best of Minnesota.
Tonight, I have spoken of three priorities which will move Minnesota forward -- tax reform, education, and a major investment in research.
We must forge our own future.
Minnesota, the model state, Minnesota, the brainpower state, Minnesota, the world-renowned research center.
Minnesota will be-ready for the challenge of the 21st century.
We are limited only by our skills, our determination, and our imagination.
Thank you and good night.Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, Mr. Chief Justice, Members of the Court, Constitutional Officers, Members of the Legislature, and my fellow Minnesotans:
Five years ago I stood before you as a newly elected governor and told you that the state of our state was not good. My message at that time was basic - we needed to form partnerships, create jobs and balance our budget. I also said that Minnesota needed a long-range plan to see where we were headed five, ten and twenty years down the road.
We are now five years down that road. Tonight I stand before you to report that the state of our state is good and will continue to get better. We have paid off our debts by forming the partnerships that have put 306,000 people back to work. I'm really proud of that. And we have a longrange plan - a blueprint for job creation ~ to carry us into the 21st century on the strength of brainpower.
Our blueprint is faithful to Minnesota's heritage of action through partnerships. It does not include any quick fixes or free rides. It concentrates on hard work, homework, teamwork and - above all - meaningful work for every Minnesotan.
We are moving ahead with the blueprint on four main fronts.
First, we are improving our system of educational excellence so that our children can become the most creative and talented workforce in the world.
Second, we are expanding our applied research and development programs to transform fresh ideas from the classrooms into high technology jobs for our economy.
Third, we are reforming our tax system and" making our government services more efficient. We are balancing our taxing and spending so that our businesses are profitable and all of our people are given the opportunities that they deserve.

And fourth, we are continuing Minnesota's tradition of strong environmental protection that is so basic to our health and quality of life.
Already, this blueprint for job creation has helped us to act before we have to react. We have replaced budget deficits with a budget reserve that insures us against financial uncertainty. We have dropped Minnesota's tax rate out of the top 10 in every category of personal income tax. After years of being in debt, our Unemployment Compensation Fund is at $145,000,000. Our unemployment tax rate is down to twenty-first in the nation and is lower than three of our neighboring states.
The main reason for this improvement is that we have put people back to work. In the past year alone we created over 70,000 jobs in Minnesota. Over one-half of those jobs, I'm very happy to report to you, were created in Greater Minnesota.
And we have saved jobs, by tackling the tough issues during the most difficult times.
In the midst of the farm crisis we created the first - and the best - farm mediation program in the country. It helped thousands of Minnesota farmers to survive and reap last fall's record harvests. When the federal government saw that Minnesota had the lowest rate of farm bankruptcies among agricultural states, they adopted our mediation program as a national model.

Our share of the national jobs in wood products jumped from 7 percent to 14 percent and our use of wood fuel saved Minnesota consumers $740,000,000.
As we rebuild farming, mining and wood products, our job growth continues in the high
. technology industries such as computers and health care.
It adds up to a strong, robust economy throughout Minnesota.
But there is still plenty of work that needs to be done. The people of Minnesota expect me to back up my beliefs with personal leadership and programs of substance.
That is exactly what I will continue to do.
The legislative proposals I present tonight are bold, but they are not surprising. They continue the familiar theme of jobs, jobs, and mure jobs.
Jobs through educational excellence, jobs through applied research and economic development, jobs through tax reform and jobs through a clean environment.
That is the blueprint. Here are the details.
I begin with education because education lays the foundation for everything we do in Minnesota. It consumes nearly one-half of our state budget. But every cent we invest in education produces dividends in our future economy. .

The same thing with mining - partnerships

saved jobs.



We joined with organized labor, Minnesota Power and Light and the taconite companies to make our taconite industry more competitive in world markets.

This year, everyone of our six plants will be at full production, producing 40,000,000 tons of taconite, our highest output in seven years.

Yet another success is our wood products and timber industry, where the private sector has invested over one billion dollars over the past five years and plans to invest $1,400,000,000 in the next five years.

I am proposing a series of reforms to improve what is already the lowest dropout rate in the nation. Our goal is "96 by 96," a 96 percent graduation rate by the year 1996.
To help our young children who have learning difficulties, I propose that local school districts be given the opportunity to invest in Early Childhood Education programs. We will also increase funding for our Head Start programs. Each dollar we invest in Early Childhood Education saves us nearly five dollars in spending later on.
I also propose that we offer Extended School Day programs in our schools from dawn until dusk. These programs will lower the dropout rate and help bridge the time gap between a normal school day and a normal work day.


In public hearings around the state, I have heard the anguish in the voices of working parents. I've heard this time and time again as they describe the choice between going on welfare and leaving their children alone because they cannot find affordable childcare.
The choice is even more tragic when the parent is in high school. Teenage pregnancy is one reason why one-half of the long-term users of Public Assistance in Minnesota are dropouts.
I am determined to break this cycle of poverty.
Beginning July 1st, school-aged welfare recipients must stay in school to be eligible for full benefits in Minnesota. For this plan to work responsibly, we need childcare for our high schools.
I have visited the childcare facilities in the Technical Institutes. For as long as I have been in public service, nothing has made me feel better than watching the students eat lunch with their child or children, return to class and then go home with their children at the end of the day.
Finally, I propose that state aid be extended to any adult who wants to come back and finish high school.
This package of reforms will deliver the message that it is never too early or never too late to learn in Minnesota. It will confirm that we do not drop people out of our school systems; we keep people in and bring people back so they can earn a diploma and a decent living for themselves and their families.
We will also challenge our students to set higher standards for themselves. So I propose a voluntary Governor's Scholarship Test at the 6th and 10th grade levels. Students who score at the top 25 percent on their test will receive a certificate as a Governor's Scholar. The top two achievers from each school district will be awarded a free quarter of college tuition when they graduate from high school.
I'm sure you can imagine with me the appetite for learning among 6th grade students who have already earned a stake in their post-secondary education!

..

To match that competitive enthusiasm with a sense of civic duty, I also propose naming Governor's Scholars for community service in each school district. By tutoring their classmates and promoting literacy in their neighborhoods, these students would receive the same tuition incentives as the academic scholars.
While visiting Marshall High School in Duluth last fall, I saw for myself the beauty of the best and the brightest students teaching their peers. A gleam of excitement and gratitude was in everybody's eyes. It was contagious. This kind of teamwork continues Minnesota's great heritage of action through partnerships.
It is the kind of teamwork we need if we are to compete effectively in the world economy. The information age-- has taken over the workplace. The jobs of the future rely more and more on applied research and the refinement of ideas.
It used to be that you learned a trade and that was your job security. But today, high-technology jobs are being restructured at least every seven years. Our workers require constant reeducation and training to keep pace with our changing technology.
To protect and prepare our working people, I propose a Minnesota Employment and Training Fund.
This fund would help retrain workers who have been laid-off from long-term employment due to plant closings and other severe shifts in the economy.
It would inspire more Minnesotans like Marilyn Wolfe of Bemidji to discover new skills. In the summer of 1982, Marilyn was a 39-year old single parent of two who had been laid off from her job at U.S. Steel's Minntac Plant at Mountain Iron, Minnesota. She made the courageous decision to go back to school.
Marilyn sold her possessions ana took a series of part-time jobs in order to attend the Technical Institute of Eveleth. After transferring to Bemidji State, she got straight A'son' her first report card. She decided she wanted to maintain that record for four years, and believe it or not she did - a straight 4.0 - all A's!


Last summer Marilyn went to Harvard.
This year she is attending the Yale University School of Organization and Management.
Who knows what this remarkable woman will do next?
I'd like to present to you Marilyn Wolfe!
There is much more that could be said. Her son went back as a mechanical engineer. Her son-in-law, who also had lost his job, will be an electrical engineer. So, from a blue collar family she's creating a family of people all going to college with college degrees. Isn't that wonderful?
I appointed Marilyn to the Minnesota State Board of Vocational Technical Education in 1983. During her two years on the board she constantly worked at finding ways to help nontraditional students to cope with the problems of getting an education.
The Employment and Training Fund is a response to her advocacy and a tribute to her determined spirit, a spirit that should be encouraged in every Minnesotan.
Retraining our workers is one piece of the partnership we need to succeed in the world economy. The other pieces are a first-rate postsecondary educational system and a program for applied research and development. -
We have begun the Commitment to Focus at the University of Minnesota, an important investment in our economic future. As we streamline the University's focus, we must establish our community colleges, our state universities, and our technical institutes as magnets for regional high-technology business growth.
That is why- I have come to Winona this evening. This campus, this city and this region are a perfect example of how partnerships between business and education can stimulate economic development.
Under the outstanding leadership of President Tom Stark, Winona State is an active- participant in a county where the unemployment rate is under five percent.

Thousands of people in this city are designing, manufacturing and selling the high-technology products that shape our future.
The Watlow Company is a world leader in the design of environmental test chambers.
The Fiberite Company makes heat shields for NASA rockets that endure temperatures up to 6,000 degrees.
Both companies are expanding in Winona creating more high-paying jobs to anchor the community.
Winona State's new engineering program is scientifically designed to provide these companies wIth skilled workers from among the local residents. These community partnerships form the essence of our blueprint for job creation.
We can see it in the training provided by the Winona Technical Institute. We can see it in the proposed expansion of the Rochester Center just west of here , where high-tech companies like the Mayo Clinic and IBM will invest in the education of local students to create quality jobs in that community.
At the government level, we must back up our support for these partnerships with' bricks and mortar. Higher student enrollments are bulging the seams of our campus facilities at Mankato Winona, St. Cloud and many other campuses: We must expand to meet the demand. We must develop creative programs like the proposed Agricultural Research Institute and the International Language Villages at Concordia College, Which help us to think globally and act locally.
We must accommodate and channel the brainpower that is crackling in every corner"and community of Minnesota.
Our public-private partnerships are joined toget?er by the Greater Minnesota Corporation, whIch paves a path for innovation from the classroom to the marketplace.
The GMC is the most strategic long-term job growth effort ever launched in Minnesota. It is a public corporation that operates like a business.


To protect itself from politics and swings in the economy, the GMC has invested its seed money. It will operate only on the interest and profits from that investment.
Let me give you just one example of how an applied research program like the Greater Minnesota Corporation can help create jobs in Minnesota.
University researchers in England and an agricultural lab in Illinois have come up with a way to produce biodegradable plastic bags using cornstarch. Consider the possible benefits from this single product.
A new market for millions of bushels of corn from Minnesota farmers.
New jobs for people who produce, market and distribute the bags.
Most important, a product that is compatible with Minnesota's tradition of environmental preservation.
The GMC will speed up the process that turns ideas into jobs.
No wonder former Governor Elmer Anderson has said:
"In launching the Greater Minnesota Corporation, we may have an agency that will be hailed fifty or one hundred years from noW as having generated a new level of prosperity and growth for our state.
"The Greater Minnesota Corporation comes at a strategic moment in the state's history, and can make an enormous contribution in the future."
Governor Anderson is right. To develop the products of tomorrow we need the Greater Minnesota Corporation.
There has been talk of raiding the GMC treasury to finance short-term programs in need of funding. This would be like burning our clothes to stay warm, or, as Senate Majority Leader Roger Moe has said, "It's like eating our seed corn." It's short-term thinking that

would shortchange our efforts to revitalize Greater Minnesota.
Another element of our blueprint for job creation is tax reform.
I have pledged to you that we will have a tax system that is competitive, fair, simple and job-creating, and I have held myself to that pledge despite the pressure of special interest groups.
Let me be specific.
Our competitive tax system cut personal income taxes by 26 percent. We dropped our income tax rate from 4th highest in the nation to 16th.
We cut the corporate tax rate from 12 to 9.5 percent, droppin~ the rate from the highest in the nation to 9th.
We cut our inheritance taxes down to the lowest in the nation.
And just last week, the Minnesota Taxpayers Association lowered Minnesota from 6th to 12th in total state and local tax collections per capita, the lowest ranking we've had in 17 years.
Last year, our Fair Tax System closed loopholes and special tax preferences. We required 8,000 corporate taxpayers to begin paying corporate taxes. We dropped 125,000 low-income Minnesotans from the tax rolls.
As a result, three out of four Minnesotans will be paying the same tax or less tax in 1988 than they were in 1986.
We simplified the tax system which allows two-thirds of Minnesota's taxpayers to fill out a tax form that has been reduced from 46 lines to nine lines.
That's right, from 46 lines to nine lines.
On the other side of the coin, we have increased the efficiency of our government services. We deliver quality services in state government while ranking 47th in the number of state employees on a per capita basis.

Our award-winning STEP program has come up with more than fifty ways to save money and improve services.
STEP is currently the subject of a case study at Harvard. It has quietly made a big impact on our state government and I am very, very proud of the people that are involved.
We will continue to improve government efficiency and reform our tax system.
This year I am proposing a major reform in our property taxes. We will reduce the number of property tax classifications from 68 to 4 and cut our Commercial/Industrial property tax rate by ten percent.
This continues our effort to produce a tax system that is competitive, fair, and simple; a tax system that helps create jobs in Minnesota.
I am confident about our economy, and our ability to create jobs. But the stock market crash on Wall Street and the huge deficits in Washington show us that we must be careful with our money. This means keeping our budget reserve at its current level of $345,000,000.
Last but certainly not least, our blueprint for job creation requires respect for our environment. We are a state of clean air, sparkling blue water, golden prairies and vast green forests. The beauty of our physical environment is Minnesota's blessing. The preservation and maintenance of that beauty is Minnesota's duty and a noble part of its heritage.
We had the nation's first - and strongest acid rain standards. More recently, our Reinvest in Minnesota program helped farmers transform acres of fragile and marginal lands into habitat for our fish and wildlife. But we must continue to be vigilant and take steps to protect our resources before they become endangered.
It is in that spirit that I propose a Comprehensive Waste Reduction and Recycling Act. This Act will help us regulate what goes into our landfills and prevent the contamination of our precious groundwater.

For every 100 bottles and cans we use, We recycle only three of them. The 12.5 million cubic yards of solid waste that we generate each year could fill up the Metrodome a hundred times, or about twice a week. You can see why our landfills are overloaded and why we need to do something about it.

The Recycling Act would coordinate our local recycling programs and give them enough money to be effective.

This money would come from a small deposit on beverage containers and a fee on non-degradable plastics that can't be recycled. Every Minnesotan should have the opportunity to recycle and to protect our groundwater. Passing this Recycling Act will give us that opportunity.

The final proposal I will make tonight will correct a basic flaw in our Environmental Protection Plan - the lack of a long-term funding source. Piecemeal funding for our environment is not enough. The truth is, adjusting for inflation, the money we spend to protect our natural resources has not grown over the past twelve years.

This is why I propose a Minnesota Environment and Natural Resources Trust Fund. This trust fund will provide the stable, long-term source of money needed for the care of our land, our air and our water.

The great Minnesota Naturalist Sigurd Olson has said:

"Our most important goal is preservation of

the land which is our home. To survive, we must

be eternally vigilant and embrace the broad concept of an environmental ethic."


The Minnesota Environment and Natural Resource Trust Fund would establish that environmental ethic so necessary to the survival of our children and grandchildren.

To fund this long-term initiative, I propose that the Legislature put the question of a state lottery on the ballot for the people to decide. And if the people approve the lottery, I propose that half of the proceeds be earmarked for the Environmental Trust Fund, and that the other

half go for the Greater Minnesota Corporation. This would provide us with tremendous environmental and job-creating benefits for decades to come.
A common thread has run through the proposals I have made this evening. They each represent durable policy, and focus on creating jobs both now and in the future.
From our "96 by 96" reforms and our bonding bill for education to our Employment and Training Fund....
To the Greater Minnesota Corporation To comprehensive tax reform ... Up to our Environmental Trust Fund The components of our blueprint for job creation prepare us for a secure and prosperous life - both now and in the 21 st century. We have worked long and hard to get to this point. We have carved out a program for educational excellence that has become a national model. We have established a public corporation for economic development that has the savvy, the flexibility and the clout to create jobs in Minnesota. We have totally overhauled our tax system. We have used the resources of our environment with a healthy respect for the consequences. Now we are poised and determined to follow through on our blueprint for job creation. I look forward to working with the Legislature to enact this blueprint, forming the legislative partnership that expresses the will of our people. I will tell you quite simply that I love the land and the people of Minnesota with all my heart. I am proud of the heritage that is Minnesota. And I will do everything in my power to uphold that heritage. Thank you and good night.Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, Mr. Chief Justice, members of the Court, Constitutional Officers, members of the Legislature, former Governors - I want to take this opportunity for a little nostalgia. Fifty years ago, 26-year-old C. Elmer Anderson and 32-year-old Harold Stassen became Lieutenant Governor and Governor of Minnesota - 50 years ago today. I ask them both to stand at this time.
My fellow Minnesotans - in 1983, Minnesota's unemployment rate was over 10 percent.
We had lost our triple-A credit rating.
Our budget was on the brink of bankruptcy.
And we had no rainy-day fund.
Today - in 1989 - the State of our State is much stronger.
Our unemployment rate is at four-and-a-half percent.
Over the past six years - we have created more than 340,000 jobs in Minnesota.
Our credit rating has been upgraded, and deficit spending has been replaced by sound fiscal management.
We have a rainy-day fund for financial emergencies that now totals 550 million dollars.
Together, we have been through bad times and good.
Consistently, from the bad times of 1983 to the good times of 1989 - the central goal of this administration has been the same -
Job Creation.
From the bad times of 1983 to the good times of 1989, we have focused on job creation through partnerships in four. key areas - 
Jobs through education ...
Jobs through research and development ...
Jobs through a clean environment ...

And jobs through tax reform and sound fiscal management.
Tonight, I ask once again that we continue this tradition of job creation.
First - by building the world's best education system.
Second - by fostering research and development.
Third - by maintaining the finest quality of life through a clean environment.
And fourth - by improving the business climate through tax reform.
We begin with education because our jobs and the jobs of our children will depend upon the quality of our educational system.
Just as our parents lifted themselves up by their bootstraps, our children will move themselves forward on the strength of their brainpower.
Four years ago today - on January 4th, 1985 - we launched an education plan known as "Access to Excellence" -
A plan that the Christian Science Monitor has since called - "The most intensive, substantial effort at education reform in United States history."
Under Access To Excellence, we are the first state to establish the right of students to choose the schools and the programs best suited to their needs.
Under Access To Excellence, we were the first state in the union to allow high school students to take classes at colleges and universities at state expense.
Under Access To Excellence, we have provided a variety of education options for students who have dropped out or who are at risk of dropping out of school.
And under Access To Excellence - we enable students to choose an elementary or secondary school on the basis of quality and compatibility with their needs.
Choice works.
If you have any doubts, consider Stacy Condon of Minneapolis.

Earlier this year, Stacy's mother wrote to tell me what a difference Access To Excellence had made in the Condon family.
Two years ago, Stacy was ranked in the lower third of her high school class, and planned to quit school at the age of 16.
But after enrolling in our post-secondary enrollment options program, Stacy discovered the joy and the power of learning.
Last June, she simultaneously graduated from high school and completed her first year of college with a full 45 credits and a highB average.
"Stacy had the ability to succeed," her mother wrote, but "without an alternative educational program, I'm convinced she would not have graduated."
Stacy's mother ended her letter' with these words: "There is ao doubt in my mind that the money spent to support Stacy through this program will be repaid many times over in the form of taxes generated through higher earnings and the personal contributions she will make as an educated member of our society."
At this time I would like to introduce Stacy Condon and her mother, Marilyn. Would you please stand. We are very proud of you, Stacy.
Stacy's story will be repeated time and time again throughout Minnesota if we provide the information necessary for our students to make informed choices.
Four years ago, I said that our educational system should be strengthened through competition and accountability.
Last month, the legislative auditor issued a report on our educational system,_ that affirmed the need for greater accountability.
Tonight - as I did in 1985 - I am calling for statewide testing.
Testing will be conducted in the core curriculum areas of math, science, English and social studies at both the 6th and 10th grade level.
The state will publish the results on a district-by-district basis.

Testing will provide information that helps parents and students choose which schools best fit the students' needs.


Choice, supported by testing, will create a marketplace for education that is accountable and responsive to the individual needs of our students.
Competition in education through school choice is the way to build the world's best educational system, and continue our tradition of job creation.



Research and development is the second consistent component of our job creation strategy.
Over the past six years, private industry research has focused more on short-term investments. At the same time, the federal government has concentrated its research in highly classified areas of defense.
We have accepted the challenge of filling in the research gap, to create another generation of 3Ms, Blandins and Crays for the 21 st century.

In 1983, we began building engineering schools in St. Cloud, Mankato and Duluth, and a Natural Resources Research Institute at UMD.

Since then we've added another engineering school in Winona, a Supercomputer Institute at the University of Minnesota, and two months ago began work on four Agriculture Research and Utilization Institutes.

These agricultural institutes will develop technologies that create new uses for our crops and expand markets for our farmers.

Last year, I showed you a biodegradable plastic bag made from cornstarch, using a technology that researchers say could use up to 500 million bushels of corn a year.

Another agricultural product with great potential is a printing ink made from soybeans.

This newspaper - Agri-News - is just one of the many publications in Minnesota and across the country that are being printed with a soybean-based ink.

As with biodegradable bags, this product is opening new markets and increasing demand for crops grown by our farmers.

We have established the Greater Minnesota Corporation as the centerpiece of our research and development effort.
The GMC is up and running - and already is earning respect.
The Chicago Tribune has called it the most far-reaching state plan for research and technology in the country.
And here in Minnesota, the St. Paul Pioneer Press-Dispatch has written that the GMC is on a course that "should bring economic development projects to both rural "and urban areas of the state," and "would expand Minnesota's role as one of the nation's leading science and technology states."
The fact is that research and development represents the most dynamic force' for job creation in the global economy.
President Reagan has said that technology will lead to a new industrial revolution.

Soviet President Gorbachev has called technology the key to transforming his nation's economy.
The Japanese are counting on technology to make them the economic superpower of the 21st century.
The competition is fierce - but our
commitment is strong and our vision is clear.
Whether it is research and development for
agriculture or biotechnology, for supercomputers or natural resources, Minnesota will
take a back. seat to no one when it comes
to turning the ideas of the classroom into products for the global marketplace.
Our commitment to research and development will make Minnesota one of the nation's
leading science and technology states.


The third consistent component in our job creation strategy is firmly embedded in Minnesota's great heritage - the protection and preservation of our environment.

In 1983, the Conservation Foundation conducted a survey to see which states  if any - could simultaneously develop their economy and protect their environment.
When the group issued its report, Minnesota was ranked number one for protecting our environment while developing the economy.
Since then, we have lived up to our position of national leadership in this field.
In 1983, we created a state Superfund to clean up toxic waste.
In 1986, we passed the Re-Invest In Minnesota program to protect thousands of acres of land as wildlife habitat.
Finally, in November of 1988, the people of Minnesota overwhelmingly endorsed the creation of an Environment and Natural Resources Trust Fund, the first of its kind in the nation.
These are just a few of the reasons why the Nature Conservancy has said - "When looking for leadership in natural areas protection, we and other conservation organizations throughout the nation have always looked with respect and admiration to Minnesota."
As the nation looks to Minnesota in 1989, our environmental leadership will continue.
The drought of last year taught us that our water resources are fragile and require constant care to ensure their proper use.
In the coming weeks - I will outline a program for water protection.
And I will talk about our vision for an Environmental Compact of the States.
We know that many of the challenges to our environment extend beyond the borders of a single state.
These challenges require national cooperation and national leadership.
As the chair of the Education Commission of the States, I have seen bow effectively states can work together through a national partnership to address common concerns in education.

I believe an Environmental Compact of the States - headquartered right here in Minnesota - can bring Americans together in a similar fashion to address common concerns about the environment.
As an official from the Natural Resources Defense Council has said - "There have always been some states like Minnesota that have been out in the forefront and didn't need the federal government to tell them what to work on."
An Environmental Compact of the States will once again prove the truth of that statement, and will help safeguard the clean environment that is critical to our tradition of job creation.
The fourth and final consistent component of our job creation strategy is tax reform through sound fiscal management.
Back in the difficult days of 1983, when there were many demands on our revenues, I offered the challenge that we tighten our belts and establish a budget reserve - a rainy day fund to protect us from shifts in the economy.
Today, while the federal government faces a mountain of debt, and states from California to Massachusetts and from New York to Arizona wrestle with cutting services or raising taxes to balance their budgets, we have kept our rainy-day fund secure.
This policy of sound fiscal management will continue.
Failure by the federal government to solve the federal budget deficit and to correct the trade imbalances could have severe adverse effects on the Minnesota economy, as well as the rest of the nation.
Even as we experience an economic boom in many parts of the state, and even as there are funding requests for many worthy programs, I will call again for budget restraint to protect us against the effects of any possible downturns in the economy.
We tightened our belts in the difficult days of 1983. We know we can hold the line on spending in 1989.


In previous speeches - I have said that our first and foremost objective is to make Minnesota competitive with the rest of the country.
Since that time, we have lowered our corporate tax from 12 to 9.5 percent.
We cut our individual income tax rate in half.
We reduced our inheritance taxes from among the highest in the nation to among the lowest in the nation.
And our unemployment compensation rates are now 21 st in the nation.
We are proud of these successes.
In 1989 - our work on tax reform will continue.
Property taxes remain a major problem for many Minnesotans.
I am committed to reducing property taxes where the burdens are the highest - for middle-value homesteads, apartments, rental homes, and for businesses.
We must also reform the way the state finances local government operations.
Sixty-five percent of all state tax dollars are sent back to schools and local governments.
I will be proposing ways to improve the fairness and efficiency of this property tax system.
Property tax reform will further improve our business climate - which has turned around in the past six years.
In 1983, everyone talked about a job drain from Minnesota to North Dakota and South Dakota.
But in 1989, the man who was Governor of North Dakota six years ago - Allen Olson - goes to work at his job in Minnesota.
And in 1989, the man who was Governor of South Dakota six years ago - Bill Janklow - also works in Minnesota.
The fact is that there are more than seven business start-ups or expansions in Minnesota every single day of the year.

That is a net start-up and expansion figure that takes into account the businesses you read about that leave this state.
Furthermore, the failure rate of Minnesota businesses is 45 percent lower than the national average.
The bottom line is that not only do we create jobs in Minnesota - we preserve and enhance the jobs that we have created.
In every region of the state last year, businesses responded to the brainpower and productivity of Minnesota's workers.
The Swift Meat Company expanded its operations in Worthington, calling it the crown jewel of its national operation.
IBM chose its employees in Rochester to design and manufacture its newest line of computers.
The Deluxe Check Corporation created 1,500 manufacturing jobs through its expansion in Shoreview.
And in the largest private sector industrial expansion in Minnesota history, Boise Cascade is investing one-half billion dollars into its paper mill in International Falls.
These expansions by our top corporate citizens create tens of thousands of jobs and deserve to make headlines.
They represent the essence of the Minnesota spirit, and the essence of our tradition of job creation.
Since 1983, you have heard me say that my top three goals as Governor are jobs, jobs and more jobs for the people of this state.
I would like to close this evening by sharing my thoughts on what a job means to me..
A person with a job knows that he or she can do something well enough to be paid for it, and that knowledge provides dignity and hope.
A job gives a person the power to dream, and the strength to work toward the fulfillment of that dream.

I have seen the way people who do not have a job are treated.
I have seen the struggle and the quiet desperation that many of them endure.
Many of you have heard me talk about growing up on the Iron Range where my father was an iron ore miner.
When he had a job, our family was happy.
But I learned at a very young age that when my father's lunch bucket was on the shelf, there would be no job for him that day and less income for the family.
The longer that lunch bucket stayed on the shelf, the less my father would speak, and the more I would see tears on my mother's face.
Through those hard times, my parents held the family together with love and hard work - and taught my brothers and me the meaning of a job.
Tonight I would like to publicly introduce my mother and father, Mary and Anton Perpich - the first time they have attended one of my State of the State speeches.
And I would like to thank them for the examples that they set for me, and the lessons that they gave to me, on the value of never giving up, or giving in to despair.
I thought of my parents and my childhood often during the early part of this decade when Minnesota was hit with a double depression in our mining and farm economies.
We all read in the papers of the number of jobs lost, and we saw mining towns like Babbitt and Silver Bay devastated - and Main Street businesses in farm towns like' Benson and Appleton and Slayton closing their doors.
Back in those difficult days, I knew that behind each number in the jobs-lost column was a family struggling to survive.
And behind the doors in the homes of those mining and farm families, there were people suffering in silence and tears.
It was during that time that I decided that jobs would be the central and overriding goal of this administration.
10

And it was during that time that I developed a job creation strategy, based on the belief that every single one of us deserves the chance to make a better life through a job that pays a decent wage.
In every State of the State message since 1983, this strategy for job creation has remained consistent.
Tonight I renew my pledge to the people of Minnesota, that as long as I am Governor - in boom times and recession, in good times and bad - I will remain consistent in my efforts to create jobs.
Jobs through education . Jobs through research . Jobs through a clean environment ... And jobs through tax reform. Together, we will carry our tradition of job creation forward... Today, tomorrow, and into the future ... where our hopes, dreams and accomplishments await us. Thank you and good night.Mr. Speaker, mr. President, mr. Chief justice, members of the court, constitutional officers, members of the legislature, former governors, people of Minnesota. Eleven weeks ago i asked Minnesotans to tell me how drugs affected their lives.
And here is what they said.

Drugs destroy lives. Drugs have no place in Minnesota. No place in our schools no place in our neighborhoods. No place in our families. Drugs have overwhelmed other states but not Minnesota. Minnesota leads the nation because Minnesota met the drug problem head-on. Over half a century beginning at willmar state hospital and then at hazelden Minnesota developed a program for treating addiction. Known as the Minnesota model the program saves lives all over the world. Most states would be satisfied having given the world a treatment program but Minnesota has done more. Minnesota always does more. In Minnesota we build on our success. Since 1983 we have more than doubled funding for alcohol and drug prevention programs in our schools. In 1983 we created the criminal justice task force. In 1985 we created the chemical dependency treatment fund. Minnesota was the first state to provide drug treatment on demand. In 1986 Minnesota's plan for using federal anti-drug money was recognized as a model for the nation. In 1987 we created the high school graduation incentives program which gives students with drug problems a chance to start over.

In 1989 ... Based in part ... On the work of the criminal justice task force we passed tougher criminal penalties for people who possess or sell drugs.
In 1989 ... We also enacted the "year of the city." we are rebuilding neighborhoods ... Training the unemployed ... And providing mental health care and child care.
Drugs will not disappear unless our communities are healthy. Our drug policy is comprehensive ... We treat both the individual and the community.
We in Minnesota government always do more than expected ... Because the people of Minnesota always do more than expected.
During the last six weeks ... I have met with people dedicated to chasing drugs and crime from their neighborhoods.
In minneapolis.. I visited with members of the whittier neighborhood who are forcing landlords to evict tenants who run crack houses.

In st. Paul ... I met with nick davis ... One of the heroes of the drug war. Nick and his neighbors are chasing drug dealers out of their neighborhood. Minnesotans know that apathy is the drug dealer's greatest ally. Minnesotans are willing to organize their communities against drugs ... But they need guidance and they need funding. The state will supply both. As governor ... I am determined to multiply neighborhood drug programs. With every Minnesota neighborhood organized against drugs ... We will have a strike force four million people strong. Four million people fighting the spread of drugs. Four million people helping those addicted to drugs. Minnesota ... I am proud to say ... Provides treatment on demand. Most areas of the country have long waiting lists. With drugs ... Delay means death. Waiting lists in Minnesota will never be acceptable. We must increase funding for our chemical dependency treatment fund. We must also continue to develop specialized treatment programs.

Last week i visited the four winds program in brainerd ... A treatment program developed specifically for native americans. The program combines native american history and culture with a modern treatment program.
The four winds program works. Specialized treatment programs work.
I am also asking for resources to develop aftercare programs. We must help people as they adjust to drug-free lives.
Drug-free lives for all Minnesotans ... That is my goal. A goal we will not reach until we decide that drug use is unacceptable. As unacceptable as slavery ... As unacceptable as torture.
Drug addiction is a form of slavery ... It is a form of torture.
Until Minnesotans harden their minds against drug use ... We will need a strong criminal justice system to shield us from the violence of drugs.
To improve law enforcement ... I recommend we hire more agents for the bureau of criminal apprehension ... Expand training of local police ... And provide funds to local law enforcement task forces.
And to help courts respond quickly i recommend 12 new judges.

In addition ... I ask the legislature to expand sentencing alternatives and supervised probation so nonviolent criminals can be dealt with more effectively. I also ask the legislature to expand the drug treatment programs in prisons. No one should ever leave prison with a craving for drugs. The theme of my speech is "building on success." in the fight against drugs ... Minnesota schools are our greatest success. Those who despair about the drug crisis should look here at jefferson high school.. And down the street at olson junior high. Both schools have nationally recognized drug prevention programs. Currently every school in the state is required by law to have a drug prevention program. I am determined that every school in Minnesota will have a drug program as good as the one here at jefferson. Let's give jefferson high school a big hand for doing such a great job. We have already more than doubled funding for school drug programs. I will ask the legislature to fund more career teachers and non-profit providers so students receive individualized attention.

And finally.. I will be proposing an increase in funding to schools so that the dare program and project charlie are available to more schools. Project charlie was created in edina 13 years ago. On a visit to woodland elementary in eagan ... I was impressed by the way project charlie got the message about drugs to children. We must bring the dare program and project charlie to more schools in Minnesota. And to reach children early ... We must involve parents. The early childhood family education program ... Strengthens families by teaching parents to help their children. Children with supportive parents are better prepared for school and have greater self-confidence. We must expand this program up to the third grade. I am also seeking an increase in funding for head start so we can serve more children ... Especially homeless children . . Head start graduates do better in school ... They do better at home ..And they do better in life. Yet only 30 percent of eligible children participate in the program.

No matter how good our teachers are ... And our teachers are the best ... There is one group of children no school alone can help. The children of addicts.
Children born addicted to drugs. Children beaten, abused and neglected.
I will propose legislation to help these children. But we can't legislate a perfect world. I need your help. We must unite to protect the children. We must unite to protect ourselves. And we must unite four million strong. To drive drugs from Minnesota.
I have asked students from bloomington to join me in a . Pledge against drugs. The pledge is in your program.
So will you please stand and join us ... A small segment of Minnesota ... As we recite this pledge:

I pledge never to use drugs to help those addicted to drugs and to fight the spread of drugs until we are the first state in the nation drug free.
I want to thank each and every one of you for pledging your support to make Minnesota drug free. Thank you very much.On January 29, 2002, as a Minnesota Senator, I attended President George W. Bush's first State of the Union address. It occurred just four months after the terrible events of September 11, 2001.
He began with these words. "As we gather tonight, our nation is at war, our economy is in recession and the civilized world faces unprecedented dangers. Yet the state of our union has never been stronger."
The President's words rang true. On the night of 9/11, I had joined with other Members of Congress on the steps of the United States Capitol, which had been spared destruction that day by the heroic actions of passengers aboard United Flight #93, led by Minnesota native Thomas Burnet, Jr.
We gathered, not as Republicans or Democrats, but as Americans. We wanted to show our nation and the world that, despite the day's horrors, our country stood strong, our leaders were united, and our government was working . . . together.
A few days later, we went together to the Pentagon and to Ground Zero.
Then I traveled with a small bi-partisan group of Senators to Afghanistan, just after American forces had routed the Taliban and al Qaeda and reopened the American Embassy, though still surrounded by razor wire and Marines.
So, when I heard the President's words, "The state of our union has never been stronger," I agreed that 9/11's disaster had united our country, our citizens, and our leaders.
I would like to say the same about the state of Minnesota today. After the most terrible economic disaster since the Great Depression; after its harsh lessons that we are all Minnesotans, whose lives, fates, and fortunes are intertwined; I wish I could say that we are all united, as we gather here this afternoon.
Whether we unite or whether we divide is hanging in the balance. The challenges we face threaten to divide us, rather than bring us together. Partisan posturing and narrow agendas threaten to overwhelm bi-partisan cooperation and compromise.
I do see promising signs of bi-partisan accord. I appreciate the constructive relationships I have established with Speaker Zellers, Majority Leader Koch, and their leadership teams; as well as with Minority Leaders Bakk and Thissen and their teams.
On the other hand, in just the second week of the legislative session, there was a hearing held on the effects of a shutdown of state government next July. A shutdown which would occur ONLY if we fail to resolve our differences before adjournment 103 days from now.

On the night of 9/11, I stood with my fellow United States Senators and Representatives on the steps of our Capitol to assure our fellow citizens that our government had not shut down, would not shut down, could not be shut down.
It is absolutely unthinkable that we would even contemplate doing so here in Minnesota. So, I ask you, legislators; I invite you; I implore you -- to join with me now, right here in our Capitol and pledge to the people of Minnesota that we will NOT shut down their government, our government -- not next July 1st, not any July 1st, not any day ever.
It should not happen; it need not happen - not as long as we are willing to work together and to compromise our individual views for the common good.
Compromise doesn't mean we have to agree, thank goodness, because we won't. It doesn't mean we can't debate, because we will. It means we can disagree, debate, and then reach a shared solution to our state's problems.
If we do so, by working together, we can rightfully tell the people of Minnesota that we succeeded. We did the very best we could, given the very difficult circumstances we inherited.
And if we all succeed together, the people of Minnesota will win. If we fail, the people of Minnesota will lose. It's that simple. It's that inescapable.
Our shared success is essential to turn our state around and get us - all of us - working again. By all of us working together.
For many years, Minnesota was known as the state that worked.
Governor Wendell Anderson, who is with us here today, is the only Minnesota Governor ever to ascend to the cover of Time Magazine for his leadership in creating "The Minnesota Miracle."
We were blessed with the largest number of Fortune 500 companies per capita of any state in the nation. Most of them were started here by Minnesotans, like my Great-Grandfather, and were built by business pioneers, like my Father, Bruce Dayton, who is here today, into successful national and international corporations.
They didn't succeed alone. Thousands of talented, well-educated, and productive Minnesotans worked hard together with them to achieve those tremendous successes.
Minnesota's economic ascendancy and social vitality were true public-private partnerships, and they occurred by the thousands throughout our state. In the fall of 1983, I traveled to Thief River Falls, as Commissioner of Economic Development, to award the first Enterprise Zone tax incentives, which Governor Rudy Perpich and the Minnesota Legislature had authorized that spring, to a seven-person business called Artco. Those business leaders and their hard-working employees built that small business into Arctic Cat, which employs well over a thousand people there.

It stands along side Digi-Key, another remarkable business success story, which its brilliant founder, Dr. Ronald Stordahl, started in his garage and which today employs some 2000 Minnesotans, who fulfill orders world-wide within 24 hours with 99.85% perfection.
Unfortunately, due to a combination of factors, Minnesota's economic success stalled during the past several years. During the last decade, Minnesota, which previously had been among the best states in the nation for economic growth and job creation, had one of the worst-performing economies.
According to a Wall Street Journal analysis, real median income in Minnesota fell by 9% from 1999 to 2008, over double the national decline of 4%. Only two other states had a worse decline. As a result, our per capita income fell from 7th highest among the states to 14th in 2009 .
Our employment growth averaged in the bottom ten among the fifty states during the past decade.
Last December, there were over 77,000 more Minnesotans unemployed than in December 2002, just before Governor Pawlenty took office. There were 5,881 fewer people working in Minnesota than there were eight years ago, even though our state's population grew during that time by over 286,000 people.
And it is worth noting that this decade of poor economic performance followed two consecutive cuts in the state income tax rates by Governor Ventura and that Minnesota Legislature in 1999 and 2000.
Fewer people paying lower taxes has meant state per-pupil aid for our students from kindergarten through 12th grade has been reduced by 14% in real, after-inflation dollars during the past 8 years. Tuition in our state's two-year public colleges has risen to the third highest in the nation; tuitions in our four-year universities are among the top ten highest.
Ten Minnesota school districts have gone to four-day school weeks, not for educational reasons, but rather for lack of money. Class sizes have grown, while thousands of talented teachers have been laid off. The average salary of those teachers who remain is 2% below the national average.
The number of road miles in poor and mediocre condition has more than doubled. Minnesota's rank among the 50 states in road condition has fallen from 8th to 27th.
Anyone who drives our state's deteriorating roads and highways, or is stuck in ever-longer metro traffic jams, or waits longer times for poorer bus service, wants a better Minnesota than this.
Any parent who has to find child care for their children because of four-day school weeks, while they're working five, wants a better Minnesota.
Any 5th grade teacher in a classroom with 36 students wants a better Minnesota.
Any college graduate, saddled with many thousands of dollars in student loans and unable to find a job, wants a better Minnesota. Anyone unable to find a job wants a better Minnesota.
Minnesotans want a better future. Minnesotans deserve a better future.

I can envision a better future.
I know what we must do to create that better future for all of us.
To progress, we have to invest. We have to invest in jobs; in education; in transportation; in the health of our people, communities, and environment; and in the transformation of government.
That is my Five-Point Plan for Future Prosperity. Invest in more jobs. Invest in better education. Invest in improved transportation. Invest in the health of our citizens, our communities, and our environment. Invest in the transformation of government services.
Investments require faith and trust. People invest in the future, only if they believe in that future. They invest, only if they trust their investing partners. They invest, only if they believe that others will do what is necessary for those investments to succeed.
To create together a successful Minnesota, we need to believe once again in each other and in our collective talents, abilities, and wisdom. We need to believe that our fellow Minnesotans are acting in good faith, doing their best, and that they, like us, want the best for their children, their communities, and our state.
So let us believe again in Minnesota. Let us believe again in one another. Let us invest together in our better future.
It begins with education.
I want to recognize and thank two of our most distinguished citizens, the retiring leaders of our two largest higher education institutions: the President of the University of Minnesota, Robert Bruininks, and the Chancellor of the Minnesota State College and university System, James McCormick.
President Bruininks has led the University of Minnesota with great distinction as its 15th President since 2002. He has served the University for 39 years, as professor, dean, executive vice president, provost, and president. Fortunately for all of us, he will continue his outstanding service to the University in a faculty position.
Chancellor McCormick began his service to Minnesota in 2001, as the leader of the MnSCU system of 32 higher education institutions statewide. He has given us a decade of strong, visionary guidance to bring those vitally important institutions together as one system. We thank him for his outstanding service to Minnesota. 
Three other very distinguished educators are with us today.
Dr. Efe Agbamu is Minnesota's Secondary Principal of the Year.
Dr. Agbamu is currently Principal at Park High School in Cottage Grove, where she instituted an International Baccalaureate program. She is recognized for her "ability to achieve academic and community goals, for improving teaching and learning and encouraging a positive school environment for staff and students." 
James Sonju, the Principal at Rochester's Lincoln K-8 Choice School, is Minnesota's Elementary School "Science and Mathematics Principal of the Year." He was selected for his work integrating cutting-edge science throughout the curriculum and revolutionizing the way his school teaches science. 
Ryan Vernosh is Minnesota's Teacher of the Year. He is a 6th grade teacher at Maxfield Magnet School in St. Paul, where he has taught since 2006. He says the two biggest issues facing education are the achievement gap and social justice. "These gaps are unacceptable and are my driving force as I prepare to teach every day." 
I salute these five great Minnesotans and all of our state's outstanding educators. They know, as I do, that better education is key to a better Minnesota. It is why I was so pleased to re-affirm last week my promise to increase state funding for public K-12 education every year I am Governor, with no excuses and no exceptions.
Our children's futures are in our hands. Their futures are our responsibility.
I ask the Legislature to follow my lead and increase state funding for K-12 education.
That doesn't mean more money to maintain the status quo. To the contrary, every additional dollar we spend on education should be directed toward improving the quality of that education.
Starting with the experiences we provide our state's children in the very first months and years of their lives.
I have been greatly impressed with the careful thought being devoted by many dedicated adults to the best use of our resources for early childhood education.
That is why I will re-establish the Governor's Council on Early Childhood Education and the Children's Cabinet, both to be led by Education Commissioner Brenda Cassellius.
This is a terrific opportunity for continued public-private partnerships, involving business leaders, foundation executives, parents, educators, and everyone else who cares about our children and their success.
Then we need to commit more state money to providing all parents with the option of affordable all-day kindergarten for their children. How can states like Alabama, Louisiana, and Mississippi fund all-day kindergarten, while we in Minnesota do not?
Despite our deficit, my budget will propose increased funding to expand the number of children who can receive all-day kindergarten. I ask the Legislature to help me find the additional money as soon as possible to make all-day kindergarten an option for every child in Minnesota.

In our shared desire to improve our elementary and secondary schools, our colleges, and our universities, I urge all of us to work together - instead of against one another.
For too long, teachers and other educators have been battered by continuing criticisms of their commitment, their ability, and their effectiveness. For too long, words like accountability, responsibility, and acceptable progress have been used to imply that there is none.
To say that is untrue does not mean we are satisfied with every aspect of our educational services today. It means that we are going to take a different approach to making them better.
We are going to listen to one another's concerns; we are going to work cooperatively and constructively; and we are going to enlist the best ideas from the real experts: the parents, teachers, principals, and superintendents, who are most in touch every day with our students and their needs.
As someone said, all the reform we could possibly use is available to us right now in those schools, colleges, and universities, which are educating students most successfully.
We need to identify those successes, share their strategies, and both encourage and require their use elsewhere.
I again ask every business in Minnesota to adopt a school, college, or university: to become actively involved in making them better. They will benefit from you, and you will learn from them.
Another crucial area of investment is in transportation. Minnesota suffers today from the failed legacy of twenty years of declining investments in our highways, roads, and bridges; in our public transit systems; and in other critical infrastructure. Our decline has been worse than most other states, which means we are falling further behind in what I consider one of the most important "business climate" measures: the quality and capacity of our transportation systems and other infrastructure.
It doesn't have to be that way. Look at our Metropolitan International Airport, where new investments have been made continuously during those same twenty years.
It's not perfect, but it's remarkable. Virtually an entire new airport has been constructed while continuing to operate the old one. It is rated one of the best-managed airports in the country and even the world.
Or consider the recently completed Highway 62 interchange, also built while remaining open for traffic. It's not perfect; yet it's a big improvement, and it provides for better public transit as well.
The notion we don't know how to invest in critical infrastructure improvements, or to implement those projects efficiently, is foolish. What's even more foolish, however, is our failure to make necessary investments in them. The results are deteriorating highways throughout Greater Minnesota and worsening congestion in our metro system.
Roads, highways, and public transit are to our state's economy, as are arteries to the human body.

If the arteries are healthy, and efficiently transport blood, oxygen, and nutrients throughout the body, everything works at its best. If, however, the arteries become decrepit or clogged, the body's performance suffers.
Minnesota is at a critical juncture with its transportation systems. Our investments are inadequate to maintain their condition or expand them to serve our growing population.
Their further deterioration will seriously constrict our future economic growth and damage our social vitality.
That is why I have asked Transportation Commissioner Tom Sorel to present to the Legislature his ideas for better roads, highways, and transit systems, and to begin the discussion of how best to finance them. I invite others with transportation and finance expertise in both the private and public sectors to join us in that discussion.
I ask the Legislature to consider creating a Transportation Finance Authority, chaired by the MnDOT Commissioner, to bring together the best minds and their ideas for financing the transportation improvements upon which our future social and economic vitality depend.
Third, we have to invest in the health, safety, and well-being of our citizens, our communities, and our environment.
Fortunately for all of us, there are so many Minnesotans who go to work every day to make our lives better.
I especially want to honor today the men and women who risk their lives to keep our lives safe.
Col. Eric Kerska is the Commander of the Minnesota National Guard's 1st Brigade Combat Team, 34th Infantry Division. The Red Bulls!
He will lead the 2,400 citizen soldiers of the 1st Brigade, when they deploy in May to support, for one year, Operation New Dawn, the drawdown phase of U.S. military operations in Iraq.
Col. Kerska has been a National Guardsman for over 21 years and a soldier for over 27 years. In his civilian career, he is a battalion chief for the Rochester Fire Department - a job he will put on hold while he serves his third tour of duty.
He is joined today by his wife, Tina, who is equally a Minnesota hero for her sacrifice in giving up her husband for the next year to protect our country. COLONEL ERIC and TINA KERSKA.
With us also is a family of Minnesota heroes: 1st Sergeant Gary Wenzel, his wife Cathy, and their 18 yearold son, Private First Class Todd Wenzel.
1st Sergeant Wenzel has been deployed twice. During his 18-month tour in Iraq in 2004-2005, Cathy Wenzel founded "Project Backpack," for military sons and daughters; and another organization, "Minnesota Veteran Family Support," providing families with services before, during, and after military deployment.

Today, the Wenzel's oldest son, Andrew, is on his way to Afghanistan; and Todd will be deploying with the 1st Brigade Combat Team later this spring.
PLEASE JOIN WITH ME IN PAYING TRIBUTE TO THIS EXCEPTIONAL MINNESOTA FAMILY: 1ST SERGEANT GARY, CATHY, AND PRIVATE TODD WENZEL.
Colonel Kerska and Private Wenzel, please extend to all of the 2400 men and women in your Red Bull unit our deepest gratitude for their heroic service to our state and nation, and our heartfelt prayers for all of your safe return.
Closer to home we are protected by the courageous women and men, who wear the uniforms of law enforcement officers throughout our state. We are honored today by the presence of the Police Officer of the Year, Adam Bailey.
Officer Bailey has been with the St. Paul Police for 6 years; previously he served with the St. Louis Park Police.
He was named the Minnesota Police and Peace Officers Association's Police Officer of the Year for his outstanding service.
Officer Bailey has also been awarded the City of St. Paul's highest honor - the Medal of Valor - for his extraordinary heroism in the line of duty. OFFICER ADAM BAILEY.
To Officer Bailey and all the Minnesotans in uniform, who risk their lives every day and night to keep all of us safe, please accept our deepest gratitude for your dedicated and heroic service.
In addition to protecting the safety of our citizens, we must do everything possible to protect their health and well-being. The best possible and most affordable health care for all of our citizens is far too important to become a political football in the 2012 Presidential Superbowl.
Minnesota has long been a national leader in health care innovation, and our citizens everywhere have benefitted enormously from that leadership.
When my Mother was hospitalized in New York City before her passing, I learned there is no private or public hospital there, at any price, which provides a quality of care that is routine throughout Minnesota. Nor can one find the quality of doctors, nurses, and other health care providers.
Those professionals, clinics, and hospitals are absolutely priceless. All Minnesotans need and deserve access to them at the most affordable prices. We can have our honest disagreements about how best to achieve that goal.
Let us promise, however, that our disagreements will be based upon honest differences over policies, not politics.

Fourth, we need transform how we provide our citizens with the best public services, most efficiently, at the lowest cost.
This is a clear but daunting challenge: How do we improve government services and performance while we also cut costs?
Minnesota is not alone. Republican and Democratic governors and legislators across the country are grappling with this crisis.
The best of them are realizing, as my son, Eric's, business school professor told him, a crisis is a terrible thing to waste, and they are getting down to business. That is what we need to do in Minnesota.
Improving government's efficiency and service quality while reducing its cost has bipartisan support -- and leadership in both the public and private sectors. I want to thank General Mills for their support of our state's Enterprise LEAN business process improvement initiative. This initiative has improved service and cut costs; it will be expanded.
We need to do more, and we will. I want to combine the best private sector expertise with our public sector experience, to make Minnesota government the best in the world.
Our Administration will lead the way. I have asked Lt. Governor Yvonne Prettner Solon and our Chief of Staff, Tina Smith, to head this effort, along with MMB Commissioner Jim Schowalter, Administration Commissioner Spencer Cronk, and Office of Enterprise Technology Commissioner Carolyn Parnell.
I have asked them to immediately identify cost savings. For example, Minnesota has already spent $168 million in this biennium on office technology, like computers and desktop printers. Local governments spent an additional $228 million. What if we pooled our purchasing power to get a better deal for Minnesota taxpayers?
We will examine every area of expenditure and contracting to find ways to cut costs, while improving services.
Longer term, we need transformational change to improve the productivity of government, and bring it fully into the 21st century. The opportunities are huge, and the savings can be enormous.
This reform will succeed best, if we work in partnership with our state employees.
The good ideas for improvements and efficiencies often come from the people who work in government every day. Treating them with the dignity and respect they deserve will be essential to our success.
Fifth, and most important, we need our business leaders to believe in Minnesota, to invest in our state, and to create more jobs for the thousands of our citizens, who want to work.
We also need better working partnerships between our state's businesses, colleges and universities, other civic organizations, and state and local governments.

We all agree upon the need to create more jobs. Putting more people to work throughout Minnesota is essential to our economic recovery, to our social well-being, to a better future for all of us.
I am pleased to report to our fellow citizens that the Legislature and I have found areas of cooperative agreement.
We agree that our state's permitting and approval processes for new and expanding businesses have been taking unreasonably long; and we are united in our determination to shorten them, while protecting our citizens and our environment.
Two weeks ago, I signed an Executive Order to begin that streamlining process immediately. DNR Commissioner Tom Landwehr and MPCA Commissioner Paul Aasen have been working with legislative leaders of both parties to put those and other improvements into legislation.
I thank Speaker Zellers, Majority Leader Koch, and the other legislators, who are working with us to achieve this progress. May it characterize our cooperative spirit throughout the rest of the session.
I hope that we can find that same cooperative spirit to pass the statewide bonding bill, which I proposed last week.
Those investments will help build a better Minnesota for generations to come. National economists, commenting on continuing high unemployment, say a crucial factor holding back job growth is that construction has not yet revived.
That is my Bonding Bill's initial purpose: to put up to 28,000 unemployed Minnesotans in the private-sector construction industry back to work.
And, through those long-term improvements, to benefit all Minnesotans for years to come.
I want businesses everywhere in Minnesota to feel wanted, valued, and appreciated by everyone in our Administration.
I have asked the heads of our Departments of Agriculture, Natural Resources, the IRRRB, and the Tourism Office to work closely with businesses in those important industries, which are so vital to our state's prosperity, especially in Greater Minnesota.
I want to thank Jason Thormodson, an 11 year-old future farmer and mechanic from Madelia, for reminding me yesterday how very important agriculture is to our state.
DEED Commissioner Mark Phillips will have overall responsibility for our business outreach; and I have asked him to revitalize the former Star Cities for Economic Development program, which I inherited, as DEED Commissioner, from the Administration of Governor Al Quie.
Governor Quie is here today, and I want to honor him for his outstanding service to our state as our Congressman, our Governor, and our leading citizen.
His Star Cities program trained local officials, Chambers of Commerce members, college and university presidents, and other civic leaders, to work in partnership and lead their cities' economic growth efforts.
Those local economic development teams need to be better supported by state officials, and I promise that their efforts will be given the highest priority by everyone in our Administration.
I will be personally available to assist them in any way I can. I thank Representative Fabian for asking me to join him and Senator Stumpf at North Star Agri Industries' recent groundbreaking in Hallock.
I appreciate Representative Hamilton and Senator Magnus inviting me to Jackson for AgCo's exciting expansion, which will bring over 100 new jobs to our state.
I stand ready to go anywhere in our state, nation, or world where there are jobs to be gained for Minnesota, and to assist the businesses who provide them.
And I am especially grateful to our Super-Volunteer, Senior Advisor Kathy Tunheim, and my good friend, Tom Borman, who will help me reach out to Minnesota's business leaders.
Some will criticize me for proposing next week to ask those successful businessmen and women and other wealthy Minnesotans to pay higher taxes.
I ask them for their forbearance during this fiscal crisis, which I did not create, but inherited, and now, with you in the Legislature, must solve.
I ask Minnesota's business leaders and other most successful citizens to give us two years to turn this Ship of State around. Not by savaging essential public services, upon which you and your employees also depend, but rather by transforming the ways in which government operates here in Minnesota.
And, with your help, to reduce the need for those services by putting people back to work throughout our state.
My Father's favorite quote was from The Bible. "To whomsoever much has been given, of him shall much be required."
You have achieved so much. I ask you, please, to help your state, your children and grandchildren, your friends and neighbors, to regain what you and I have enjoyed so much and benefitted from so greatly during our lives here in Minnesota. Please - help us restore Minnesota to greatness.
I invite you to contribute your expertise to help us regain that greatness - at the state level, and at the county, city, township, and school district levels.
Adopt a school. Volunteer in one of them. Teach a social service agency how to become more costefficient. Help the legislature and me to balance the state's budget more wisely. Contribute your ideas, your talents, and your wisdom. We need you now more than ever.
In closing, I ask all Minnesotans for the same forbearance. I ask not to be finally judged by the budget I am required to submit next week.

I ask you to remember that I was not given a blank slate on which to write my best proposals for our state's future. Neither was the Legislature. We were left a horrendous fiscal mess, a decade of economic decline, and state agencies poorly managed.
All of that must be turned around. All of it will be turned around, but not by tomorrow, and not entirely by the end of this legislative session.
WE WILL, however, TURN IT AROUND - and move Minnesota ahead once again - to reclaim our former greatness.
I approach this monumental assignment with the utmost dedication and determination. I know Lt. Governor Prettner Solon and our exceptional Cabinet do as well.
I believe our 201 Legislators feel that same awesome responsibility.
I urge them to approach their difficult decisions, as I do, with caution and care.
We will be properly judged by effects of our decisions and actions on the lives of our fellow Minnesotans - this year, next year, and for years to come. Whether we make their lives better or worse.
Together, we must shape a strategy that will create a better Minnesota, for all of us and for all who will follow us.
We must reverse Minnesota's past decline. And return our state to a path of growth, success, and prosperity.
We can; we must; and we will.
By all of us working together. . .
To get Minnesota working again.

Mr. Speaker and Members of the MN House of Representatives.
Madam President and Members of the MN Senate.
Madam Chief Justice and Distinguished Members of the MN Supreme Court.
My fellow Constitutional Officers. Members of my staff and Cabinet.
Vice President Mondale. Governor Anderson. Other Distinguished Guests. Family and friends. My fellow Minnesotans.
My father, Bruce Dayton, is 93 years old. Sundays, we have lunch together at his home in Long Lake, where I grew up.
62 years ago, my father bought 40 acres of mostly woods and a corn field for $6000. He and my mother built a house there, and we moved into it when I was five years old. Over the years, my father acquired 130 more acres. He was the first person in Minnesota to restore his fields to their original prairie grass and flowers; and he has now donated his property to the people of Minnesota, which the DNR will preserve as one of the few remaining old-growth forests in our state.
Last October, as we surveyed the beautiful fall colors on trees bordering his field of prairie grass, I said to him, You know, Dad, you have been a very good steward of this land. It is in so much better condition than when you bought it.
I often wonder how our children and grandchildren will judge our stewardship. Will they thank us for leaving our state, nation, and world in better condition than when we inherited it? Or will they ask, How could you have left us with such a mess?
The answer is for us to decide.
I am hopeful, because I believe in Minnesota. I believe in Minnesotans. And, fortunately, our state is now showing signs of a long-awaited and much-needed economic recovery. Even better, Minnesota has regained its accustomed position leading most other states economic growth, after lagging behind for much of the past decade.
Minnesotas latest unemployment rate in December 2011 was 5.7%, which was a record 2.8% below the national average. While the national economy has regained less than half of the employment lost from the depth of the Great Recession, Minnesota has regained all of its lost employment. The number of employed Minnesotans today is at an all-time high. And Minnesotas percentage increase in total wages during 2011 was almost 5 times greater than the rest of the country.
The 2012 State Business Tax Climate Index ranked Minnesota only 45th among the states. The top five were: Wyoming, South Dakota, Nevada, Alaska, and Florida. All, except for Alaska, are Right-to-Work states.
Last month, however, Minnesotas unemployment rate was lower than 4 of those 5 states. During the past two years, our growth in average hourly earnings equaled the best and beat the rest. Our per-capita income was 2nd highest.
Were doing something right.
Yet, even though 97,000 more Minnesotans are working today than at the depth of the Great Recession, there are still more than 168,000 Minnesotans, who want to work, but cannot find employment.
They must be our #1 priority. So, I say to legislators, lets take your best ideas and my best ideas and turn them into jobs! And lets do it now.
I have already sent you three major jobs initiatives. My proposed bonding bill would repair buildings and upgrade classroom equipment at our state colleges and universities. It would improve our state parks. It would help finance downtown revitalization projects in several cities.
Five outstanding Mayors are with us tonight: in alphabetical order, Mayor Eric Anderson of Mankato; Mayor Ardell Brede from Rochester; St. Paul Mayor Chris Coleman; Mayor Dave Kleis of St. Cloud; and Minneapolis Mayor RT Rybak.
My father and my uncles taught me the importance of continuously improving the downtowns of our major cities. They are the economic hearts of entire regions. If the heart weakens, the rest of the body suffers.
One-third of all Minneapolis property taxes are paid by downtown enterprises. That keeps property taxes lower for everyone else in the city.
Every year, the City of Rochester and Olmsted County send almost $90 million more to the State Treasury in taxes than they receive back in LGA, School Aid, and other assistance. Why wouldnt we want to help make these and other key cities as successful as possible?
One national study estimates my bonding bill would create 21,700 jobs, most of them in the private sector.
If youre skeptical, divide by two. Thats still more than 10,000 Minnesotans, now unemployed, who could be working all over the state.
Legislators, you are obviously entitled to your own preferred projects. I ask, however, that you develop your priorities quickly and pass a bonding bill this month.
The sooner you act, the sooner several thousand unemployed Minnesotans will be doing the work that those repairs and renovations require.
Pass the bonding bill, now. Please.
I have also proposed building a new Peoples Stadium which would provide private sector jobs for several thousand more Minnesotans.
Im amazed that some people feel no urgency to put several thousand more Minnesotans back to work.
The legislative authors, Senator Rosen and Representative Lanning, along with Chairman Ted Mondale, have been terrific partners in this undertaking. They may be getting close to a site, a deal, and a bill. Then it will be up to you in the legislature.
Some of you reportedly want to avoid voting on a stadium until after next falls elections. That would be terribly unfair to the several thousand unemployed Minnesotans, who could be working on that project this year, and to the Vikings.
Pass the Stadium Bill this session. Please.
My third jobs proposal is a Jobs Now tax credit to encourage businesses to hire unemployed Minnesotans, Veterans, and recent college graduates. It would reduce taxes for participating businesses, while putting still more of our citizens to work.
Last week, the Minnesota National Guards Adjutant General, Richard Nash, reported that of the over 3000 Minnesota Guardsmen and women presently serving in Kuwait, 22% of them will be unemployed, when they return home.
After they ALL served our country heroically, 22% of them wont have jobs. That is shameful.
It is why, in addition to my Jobs Now tax credit, I have also proposed expanding the Minnesota GI Bill to provide education benefits to all eras of veterans, because unemployment among all Minnesota veterans may be as high as twice the state average.
Sitting upstairs, are two Minnesota veterans.
Mr. Steven Jackson served in the US Army for 15 years in places like Iraq.
Mr. Jack Marshall for served 6 years in the Air Force, and did a tour in Kuwait.
These two heroes served our state and nation with great patriotism, valor, and honor. Now they cant find jobs. That is wrong.
So pass a Jobs Now bill and expand the MN GI Bill. Please.
One area in which the Legislature and my Administration have worked well together is government reform. I look forward to continuing our bi-partisan collaboration in streamline permitting processes even further, reducing the costs of public services, and making them more cost-effective.
We have already made real progress. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and the Department of Natural Resources now complete 99% of their priority permit reviews within 150 days. We can make it still faster, and we will.
It is already paying off, however. Recently, an energy consultant asked the MN Pollution Control Agency about air permitting for a potential new business.
MPCA staff walked him through the general timelines and process. Staff also offered to meet with the company in advance to help improve the proposal and provided a pre- application checklist. This consultant said he helps businesses in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois, South Carolina and California; he had never heard of another state providing this kind of service. And our 150 day turnaround seemed shorter than other states.
I also received a note from a businessman whom I met at the MN Chamber dinner. His wood products company employs 140 people in Northern Minnesota. Last year his company invested about $4 million to improve its Minnesota facility, with the possibility of another $5 million in this year. He said, None of this would have been possible without the cooperation of Commissioner Aasen and his department.
DEED Commissioner Phillips Business First-Stop is another step in the right direction. It is a one-stop shop, where new and expanding businesses can make one call and get whatever help they need.
Under the expert tutelage of companies like General Mills, state agencies are implementing LEAN practices of continuous improvement, which are saving taxpayers money and improving services. Commissioner Cronk and his Department of Administration saved $3 million in six months by revamping contracts with suppliers. The Department of Revenue, under Commissioner Frans leadership, saved $1 million by implementing electronic check processing, and greatly reduced the turn-around time for tax refunds.
At the Department of Agriculture, Commissioner Frederickson and Supervisor Harley Olinske saved taxpayers $300,000 a year, while also shortening the time for most grain and produce license renewals to less than 30 days. Mr. Olinske epitomizes the dedicated state employees, who work hard every day, and get little credit. He deserves some tonight.
Finally, Commissioner Parnell and her team are working hard to implement the legislatures decision last year to consolidate the states many IT functions. Anything that gets Representatives Kahn and Downey hugging on the House floor deserves a lasting legacy, and this will have one.
The key to our future, as we all know, is education. As President Obama says, We cant out-compete other countries, if we dont out-educate them. That means we must develop the best educational systems in the world.
Despite our other difficulties last session, we agreed upon many significant education innovations. We enacted an Alternative Licensure path for teachers.
We expanded Early Childhood Education, and our doing so was crucial to Minnesotas winning the federal Race to the Top competition against 34 other states.
We established evaluation requirements for both teachers and principals. We increased the per-pupil aid formula by $50 per student in each year of this biennium, the first real increase since 2003.
We enacted Read by Third Grade, which will be a priceless gift to the children of Minnesota, and their parents, from a wonderful legislative leader. In fact, two outstanding leaders of improving the quality of education in Minnesota are retiring after this year: Senator Gen Olson and Representative Mindy Greiling. Lets pay tribute to them now.
We accomplished a great deal last year, by working together. The US Department of Educations approval of our No Child Left Behind wavier, along with our afore-mentioned Race to the Top success, is testimony to their confidence in the positive direction of Minnesotas education innovation. That tremendous progress is a tribute to the excellent leadership of Commissioner Cassellius and legislators of both parties.
Our challenge this year is to put all of it to work for the schoolchildren, parents, teachers, and administrators throughout Minnesota. Already, however, some legislators are advancing even more new proposals.
I have a novel idea. Lets develop any education initiatives this year in cooperation with teachers, rather than in conflict with them. The best education for all Minnesota students should not be a political ploy; and I will not support anything, which is.
We face similar challenges to improve our colleges and universities throughout Minnesota.
Unfortunately, unlike K-12 education, where we increased funding last session, the University of Minnesota and MnSCU were each cut by almost 15%.
The two new heads of these invaluable institutions are here tonight. Dr. Eric Kaler is the 16th President of the University of Minnesota.
Dr. Steven Rosenstone is the 4th Chancellor of the Minnesota State Colleges and Universities system.
They are joined tonight by the new Director of the Office of Higher Education, former Senator Larry Pogemiller.The three of them, together with legislators and other higher education leaders, have the enormous responsibility to retool Minnesotas colleges and universities and give their students the crucial advantages needed to succeed in this highly competitive global economy.
Were told that by 2018, 70% of Minnesotas jobs will require some kind of postsecondary degree.
Thats just the beginning, however; not the end. Our postsecondary students need more than degrees; they need the worlds best educations -- so they can thrive in that world. And Minnesota will not thrive, unless they do.
Chancellor Rosenstone and President Kaler need our support to make all of their campuses excellent. Their curricula and classrooms must be world-class and state-of-the-art.
They must prepare their students for the jobs of the future, not the past.
Its already happening in many classrooms on U of M and MnSCU campuses. Mr. Ron Ulseth is an instructor at Itasca Community College. He developed the program Iron Range Engineering, a hands-on learning experience, where students do real engineering work for Minnesota companies.
Its so successful that the Engineering Department at Stanford University invited him there to teach their faculty about the benefits of this new model. When Iron Range Engineering meets Silicon Valley -- well, Ron, I just hope you have a share of the royalties!
Antoinette McCarthy is another wonderful success story. She said, I had tried college before, but I wasnt as successful as I had hoped. As a result, she struggled to find a decent-paying job and a career with a future.
Now, Antoinette is poised for success. She just completed a FastTRAC program at Inver Hills Community College, receiving her Certificate as a Nursing Assistant.
Her hard work for that certificate means she will earn, on average, nearly double what someone would at a minimum-wage medical job.
We need FastTRAC on every campus in Minnesota. We need state and federal job training and workforce development monies to be better coordinated with higher education funding and programs, so that all of our students come out of our educational systems, skilled and ready to succeed. The success of our state depends upon it.
Another prerequisite for our children and grandchildrens future success is for us to restore fiscal responsibility to Minnesota government.
Last year, legislators, who voted for the final budget bills, and I increased borrowing from our schools by $750 million and borrowing from our future by another $750 million. $1.5 billion in additional debt should put our so-called $876 million surplus in perspective.
If my final tax proposal, to raise income taxes on only the wealthiest 2% of Minnesotans had been accepted, not only would this bienniums budget have been balanced and that $1.5 billion of additional borrowing unnecessary; but also the current budget forecast for the next biennium would show a surplus, rather than a $1.3 billion deficit.
In fairness, I acknowledge that many of you in the legislature wanted to balance the budget by reducing spending.
Next November, Minnesotans will decide which of our approaches they prefer. Until then, let us resolve that we will conduct this sessions financial affairs responsibly.
No more borrowing.
As stewards of the public trust, I ask us to leave one final legacy to future generations of Minnesotans. Our wonderful State Capitol building is wearing down and falling apart. We can either wait until someone is seriously injured or worse, when the public outcry will compel action; or we can act now.
I am asking you Legislators to make the most unselfish vote of your careers: to kick yourselves, me, and everyone else out of the Capitol, as needed, for the four years necessary to renovate this building, and to make it both functional and safe for the next 100 years. It will be hard on all of us  but so much better for those who follow us. That is the essence of selfless stewardship. And it epitomizes the kind of legacy for which our children and grandchildren will be grateful.
When this magnificent Capitol opened in 1905, Minnesota was a very different state. And not nearly as successful.
Our citizens per-capita income was below the rest of the countrys, and it dropped to only 85% of the national average by 1920. There it floundered for the next 25 years, before beginning a gradual climb to parity with the rest of the country in the 1960s, rising above the national average in the 1970s, and continuing to improve thereafter.
So how did Minnesota become above average? The President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis recently noted, as have others, that the number of educated people in our states labor force is higher than in the nation; therefore their productivity and their work quality are better.
MinnPosts Louis Johnston attributes our success to high rates of labor force participation, especially by women; our greater investments in human capital, such as education and health care; and both public sector and private sector investments in physical capital.
As we strive to improve our state for ourselves and for our descendants, let us not forget what has lifted us from below average to above average to outstanding. Lets not destroy good wages and benefits; damage our schools, colleges and universities; or curtail our capital investments, in search of another strategy of unproven value.
Or one of proven less value.
Minnesota is a remarkable state. Our people, our businesses, our non-profits, and our governments have worked well together to achieve a standard of living and quality of life, which surpass most. Both DFL and Republican governors and legislators have contributed to that success.
Let us, please, build upon what has been done before us, not tear it down. Minnesotans want more efficient government; they want better services. And they want us to cooperate and compromise in order to deliver them.
I stand ready to work with legislators on both sides of the aisle to enact laws that will better Minnesota.
They will be the bills, which have involved members of my administration and legislators from both parties in their development.
Those bills I will support.
I am not interested in highly partisan, extreme measures, which are intended for campaign literature, rather than law.
Those bills I will not support.
President John F. Kennedy, in his book, Profiles in Courage, wrote:
It is compromise that prevents each set of reformers from crushing the group on the other end of the political spectrum. The fanatics and extremists are always disappointed at the failure of their government to rush to implement all of their principles and to denounce those of their opponents. But the legislator knows that there are few, if any, issues where all the truth and all the right and all the angels are on one side.
If we cooperate, if we share our best ideas, if we exchange our rigid ideologies for our shared ideals, we will revitalize our state. And we will be doing the jobs the people of Minnesota sent us here to do.
Only by working together can we achieve a lasting legacy, in which we  and they  can take pride.
May God Bless the State of Minnesota and the United States of America.In a State of the State Address, as in life, it's important to assess where we are, remember how we got here, decide where we want to go, and then determine how best to get there.
Comparing the state of our state today with conditions, when I took office two years ago, we have made important progress. We have much more work still ahead of us; however, we are on the way to a better Minnesota.
According to our Department of Employment and Economic Development, there are over 72,000 more jobs available in Minnesota today than when I took office two years ago. Almost 52,000 of those jobs were added in the past year.
Minnesota's job growth in 2012 was the 12th best among all 50 states; and we outperformed three of our four neighbors. Iowa ranked 30th best; South Dakota was 44th.
Wisconsin, which by the way is open for business, helped bring up the rear at 42nd. And, help spread the word across the St. Croix, their unemployment rate last month was 20% higher than ours, while our per capita income was 12% higher than theirs.
Only North Dakota, in the Upper Midwest, topped us in job growth last year, and their percent increase led the nation.
Our exports of agricultural commodities increased by 13 percent in 2012, compared with 2011. Total exports of all Minnesota goods and services have achieved eight straight quarters of record growth.
Our students' educational attainments have improved. Math scores for all tested grades, improved by 5.3 percent from 2011 to 2012, and reading scores improved overall by 1.3 percent.
We have, and continue to, lead the nation in important measures of health, including the lowest heart disease death rate, and the lowest percentage of obese or overweight children. We have the second longest life expectancy for all our citizens, and we're #1 for males.
I'll let Health Commissioner Ehlinger explain that discrepancy, and I expect that Representative Kahn will soon have a bill to correct it.
Last year, we eliminated premiums and expanded health care access for 16,000 more Minnesota children; and we were recognized for providing the Best Long Term Care Services in the nation by the AARP Commonwealth Fund.

No one should be satisfied, or complacent. However, these and many other improvements are encouraging.
We have also made great progress in restoring fiscal responsibility and operational integrity to Minnesota government, which also tells us a lot about what got us to where we are today.
I became Governor after a decade of deficits in both our federal and state governments. They squandered their positions of financial stability amidst consistent economic growth, which they enjoyed at the beginning of the 21st century, and which were then projected to continue for at least the next decade.
Few politicians can resist the opportunity to cut taxes. President Bush proposed two large tax cuts in 2001 and 2003, which I opposed as a Senator and Congress passed. In Minnesota, Governor Ventura convinced the legislature to reduce income tax rates in both 1999 and 2000. Both leaders assumed that the strong economic growth during the last half of the 1990's would continue. Unfortunately, both were wrong.
Also wrong were the politicians and economists, who promised that cutting taxes would lead to more economic growth, jobs, and revenues. Instead, the two federal tax cuts were soon followed by two recessions, the second the most severe since the Great Depression.
In the decade after Minnesota's income tax reductions, our economy fared worse than the nation and most other states. And at both the federal and state levels, big tax cuts followed by serious recessions produced large budget deficits, which threaten our current fiscal strength and future economic prosperity.
The solutions to those deficits were very clear. However, they were also very painful; so they were postponed, then postponed again, and again. Unfortunately, avoiding financial problems usually makes them worse. Fixing them then becomes even harder.
Thus, when I became Governor in January 2011, the State Budget Forecast projected a $6 billion deficit for the next two fiscal years. It took six months of difficult negotiations with the Republican-controlled legislature to finally agree upon a balanced budget.
Those decisions were hard for all of us and far more painful for all the Minnesotans denied needed services and assistance. But we had to enact a balanced budget, and we did.
Since then, an improving state economy and savings from health care reforms have boosted our finances by $2.5 billion for this biennium, enabling us to restore our reserves and repay over 60 percent of the previous school shifts.
We have repaired much of the fiscal damage we inherited, but we're not done yet. We face another deficit, projected at $1.1 billion, for the next biennium; and we still owe our schools another $1.1 billion.

My budget for the next biennium would lift us out of this miserable deficit-to-deficit cycle. It would eliminate the $1.1 billion deficit, balance the biennial budget, and begin the following biennium with a projected surplus that would enable us to pay back the remainder of the school shift.
My proposals have already aroused considerable controversy. Such debate is healthy in our democracy.
The genius of our system of governance is that no one gets to have it all her or his way. Starting with the governor.
Some will characterize any legislative changes in my budget as my loss. I don't see it that way, at all. The winners I care about are the people of Minnesota, whose collective best interests I was elected to represent. As were you in the legislature. Whatever outcome does the most to improve the lives of the most Minnesotans, makes winners of us all.
However, before we refocus on that controversy, I think we should look farther ahead. Former Governor Arne Carlson liked to say, "If you don't know where you're going, any road will take you there." I appreciate that wisdom more every year.
Where do we want to go? Where do we want Minnesota to be in a year, in a decade, or more? We will not agree on every aspect. However, if we can discover our shared goals, perhaps we will find greater accord on how best to achieve them. We can also better assess whether the path we're now on will lead us to them.
This perspective also broadens the time horizon of our decision-making. We must consider not only what is right for Minnesota today, but also what is best for Minnesota in the future.
So, what do I believe offers the best hope for a better future to most Minnesotans? I want Minnesota to provide the best jobs for our citizens, the best lives for their families, and the best environment for our businesses to provide those jobs.
Those who measure "business climate" only by tax rankings will question my strategy, although many surveys rate Minnesota lower in overall taxes than most are led to believe. We're 15th among the states in taxes, according to the Minnesota Center for Fiscal Excellence. And we rank 11th highest in per capita income.
However, Minnesota has not been considered a "low tax" state during my almost four decades of public service. And the facts show that states offering businesses and their top executives the lowest taxes usually offer the rest of their citizens the lowest incomes, the fewest public services, and the highest crime rates.
Furthermore, their job growth typically lags "high value and high performance" states like Minnesota.

So, yes, I absolutely meant what I said. I want Minnesota to provide the best jobs for our citizens, the best lives for their families, and the best support for our businesses to provide those jobs. I want Minnesota state government to provide the best value for everyone's hard-earned tax dollars and the most efficient, effective services anywhere.
I want Minnesota to offer the world's best educations for ALL of our citizens, children and grandchildren. Educations which begin early in life, and continue throughout life; so that all of us can learn the skills, and relearn the new skills, necessary to succeed in a rapidly changing and ever-more-competitive global economy.
We know that our exceptional citizens, who are more inventive, harder working, and more productive than people anywhere, have been the most important contributors to our state's economic progress and social vitality. Most of us agree that our citizens' superior educations have been crucial to our previous successes.
And many of us agree that providing all Minnesotans with the best, most advanced, and yet affordable educational opportunities will be even more essential to their future success, and thus to ours.
I will return shortly to consider whether we are on a path toward that goal.
I want all of us, and especially Minnesota's future generations, to live in a healthy environment; in safe, inclusive communities; and with the same rights and protections as every other American citizen.
A healthy life starts with, and depends upon, clean air to breathe, clean water to drink, protected natural environments to enjoy, and a secure ecological future. No one can endure the severe droughts or floods of recent years; endure (or, some, enjoy) our milder, snow-scarce winters; lather on sunscreen to walk outdoors without being greatly alarmed.

If you're not, talk with my good friend and world-premier polar explorer, Will Steger, who is here tonight, about the drastic climate changes he has witnessed.
Even more alarming is that our state and our nation are still not doing enough to reverse this path toward global catastrophe, before it is too late.

In Minnesota, we have made real progress in areas like energy conservation, more efficient farming and manufacturing practices, and the development and use of clean, renewable energy, especially wind energy, instead of polluting fossil fuels.
The question is: are we progressing fast enough? Are we doing all we can to utilize other renewables, such as solar, and also to make Minnesota the best place to locate these new industries and their jobs?
Many of you, who served in previous legislatures, deserve great credit for your pioneering work to expand our use of clean energy, including Lieutenant Governor Yvonne Prettner Solon and former Senator Ellen Anderson, who is also here tonight.
I challenge this legislature to work again with our state's visionary clean energy advocates, large energy providers, large energy users, other stakeholders, and my administration to use your past achievements as springboards for Minnesota's next big leap toward a sustainable energy future.
Safe, inclusive communities benefit all Minnesotans. Doing everything possible to stop the terrible acts of violence, which end young lives and victimize innocent people, should be an urgent priority for all of us.
Those strategies deserve and require more time than I have available tonight. Let me focus on one initiative, however, and enlist everyone's support.
Studies show that the highest incidences of juvenile delinquency and teenage pregnancy occur during the weekday hours after school. Years ago, there were more organized, supervised afterschool programs for young people. The ones remaining do exceptional work; but there are not enough of them, and they struggle to find the funding to continue.
Two years ago, I challenged businesses to "Adopt a School." Some businesses, to their great credit, were already involved in improving our schools, and others accepted my challenge.
Some, however, especially smaller businesses have told me it was just too big an assignment to adopt an entire school.
So, I invite you to "Adopt an After-School Program." It might involve a financial contribution, the donation of new or used equipment, or your employees as part-time volunteers. There are so many from which to choose, and so many young people who need better options than unoccupied time, streets, and gangs.
In the coming weeks, we will be releasing more information on how you can help. In the meantime, if you need help finding a worthy program, give me a call. I believe most of you have my home phone number by now. If not, it's 651-201-3468.
For the next two weeks, however, I'm taking calls at home only from "Adopt an After-School Program" volunteers. On anything else, please call my office, at 651-201-3499.

Let me mention one other cause, which is controversial, but consistent with my faith and my principles. And, more importantly, consistent with this country's founding principles and its Constitution. I believe that every Minnesotan should have the freedom to marry legally the person she or he loves, whether of the same or other sex.
Last year, Minnesotans began a conversation about why marriage matters, and we found our common belief that it is about love, commitment, and responsibility. I want Minnesota to be a state, which affirms that freedom for one means freedom for everyone, and where no one is told it is illegal to marry the person you love.

I realize now that I could fill the rest of the evening, and most of tomorrow morning, with my goals for "A Better Minnesota." I doubt that anyone wants to sit here for that long, and we're not set up to serve breakfast!
Many of my goals, however, are contained in my budget for the next biennium, along with new and continuing strategies to help us attain them. My budget addresses two over-riding imperatives: First, to erase a $1.1 billion deficit and balance the rest of it, while continuing to

improve the efficiency and quality of state services; and Second, to make the investments necessary to move Minnesota ahead.
How does it meet the first requirement? The old-fashioned way: by decreasing spending, enacting cost-saving reforms and raising revenues. My budget is balanced, fair and honest-- there are no gimmicks, no games.
I reduce projected state spending, while increasing investments in more jobs and better education. I continue our significant progress in improving the quality and the efficiency of state services.
And I raise revenues responsibly for the first time in many years, while also making our tax structure fairer for hard-working, middle-income Minnesotans.
My budget would reduce overall state spending for the next biennium by $1.8 billion below what was projected, when I took office in 2011. Back then, the State Budget Forecast predicted that laws enacted by the previous governor and legislature would result in expenditures of almost $39.7 billion during Fiscal Years 2014 and 2015. My current budget proposes spending $37.9 billion in that biennium, $1.8 billion less than originally forecasted.
That's worth repeating. My proposed budget for the next biennium would spend $1.8 billion less than was forecasted for those two years, when I took office.
Those who criticize my supposed lack of spending reductions evidently do not understand that many of the $2 billion cuts we made two years ago for the current biennium were permanent; and lowered spending by $2.5 billion in the next biennium, before I made my new proposals.
Take state funding for higher education, for example, which comprises the University of Minnesota, the MnSCU system, and student financial aid. Facing an overall $6 billion deficit, the 2011 legislature and I had to cut state support for higher education by 12 percent, to 2 billion, 568 million dollars.
Last November's Budget Forecast assumed the next biennium's expenditures for higher education would be the same as in the current biennium. Take a look. There are no spending increases for higher education; so, the previous 12 percent cut would continue into the next one.
However, that significant cut is only the latest reduction in state support for higher education. Last weekend, I searched the Department of Management & Budget's computerized archives, looking for a previous biennium, when the State of Minnesota spent less money, in real dollars, to support higher education.
I couldn't find one in records, which go back to the 1996/1997 biennium. I did learn that in real dollars, our state spends $569 million less on higher education in the current biennium, than we did 16 years ago.

I asked the MMB staff to look back even further, into the paper records. They found that the last time we actually spent less to support higher education, in real dollars, than we are in FY12-13 ... was in FY80-81.
I'll say it again. In every biennium since FY80-81, real state spending for all of postsecondary education has been higher than it is today.
My budget would add $240 million in higher ed. funding for the next biennium. That counts as spending increase, which, technically, it is. However, it falls over $100 million short of restoring the funding cut from FY10/11; and it still leaves state support for higher education hundreds of million dollars below the real levels 20 and even 30 years ago.
No wonder the most recent comparison of the 50 states by their expenditures for higher education per $1000 of personal income ranked Minnesota only 32nd. And no wonder tuitions keep rising, making a Minnesota college education less and less affordable for students and their families.
How much lower will we reduce our spending for postsecondary education, either in real dollars or compared to other states? Experts everywhere say that the quality and affordability of higher education is key to our future economic success. Does anyone believe that continuing to reduce our commitment to higher education is the path to a Better Minnesota?
Analyzing other areas of state government spending yields similar results. During the past decade, our state leaders reduced expenditures for many public services, both in real dollars and in comparison to other states. The latest survey places Minnesota 33rd among the states in total expenditures for K-12 education per $1000 of personal income; 37th for health and hospitals; 19th for police protection; and 48th for fighting fires.
Are we better off today after all those reductions in public services? I say, "No." Trying to cut our way to a Better Minnesota is a failed experiment.
That is why my budget takes a balanced approach. Real spending cuts are partly offset by responsible increases, mostly for better education from early childhood through post-secondary and for job creation incentives. Both are critical to assuring future economic opportunities and enhancing our quality of life.
Overall spending reductions and selective increases are one part of my balanced approach to eliminating the deficit, balancing the budget, and moving Minnesota ahead. Another important strategy is to expand the significant reforms, which my administration has made during its first two years in reducing the costs of services and improving their efficiencies.
We have instituted more reforms and achieved greater progress during our first two years than in all of the previous eight years. I will briefly mention just a few.
Today, Minnesota has retaken its rightful place as a national leader in health care reform. The cost of providing health care for increasing numbers of our citizens has, for years, been the most rapidly growing part of our state budget, as is true for virtually every other state. Curbing those cost increases, while expanding quality and affordable health care to all of our citizens, is crucial.
Our Department of Human Services contracts with managed care providers and insurance companies for most of its health care services. Thus our first target for reform was the way the state had previously contracted for those services; and we have already achieved significant cost savings.
Commissioner Lucinda Jesson's tremendous success in negotiating a 1 percent profit cap on existing contracts and putting the largest new contracts out for competitive bids, have saved state and federal taxpayers over $1 billion.
Our reforms do not stop there. My new budget proposes a comprehensive redesign of the fastest growing part of our HHS budget, our long term care system. By providing more choices to keep seniors and people with disabilities in their homes, with better care, we save $151 million in the short term. More importantly, we will have built a system that is financially sustainable when the age wave descends upon Minnesota starting in 2020.
Last week, we announced yet another reform measure that will change how the state pays for public health insurance, providing better care for 100,000 Minnesotans, and saving taxpayers an estimated $90 million.
Finally, Minnesota is one of the leading states in implementing this country's sweeping and farreaching reform of providing and paying for health care.
Over the next two years, our public programs will provide health care to an additional 145,000 poor Minnesotans who do not have insurance today. These are people who otherwise access care through costly emergency room visits, harming their health and driving up the price of health care for all of us.
And through the creation of a Minnesota Insurance Exchange, we will enable individuals, families, and businesses to make more informed decisions about good, affordable health care coverage.
In education, we have worked with DFL and Republican legislators, business executives, and other civic leaders to establish state support for early childhood learning programs, a quality rating system, and scholarships for low-income children.
My new budget would expand significantly early learning opportunities for children statewide. My proposal to provide state funds for optional all-day kindergarten would provide a continuum of learning from early childhood into first grade and beyond.
Two years ago, we worked with the legislature to make administrative and legislative reforms that streamlined businesses' permit application processes. We shortened the time taken by the Pollution Control Agency, to review permit applications to a maximum of 150 days, for all but the largest projects. We are now progressing toward the next goal of reducing those timelines to 90 days.
We're not done reforming. In fact, we're just getting started. Back in 1998, when I first ran for Governor, a campaign that most people have forgotten and I would like to, there was a television commercial for the soft-drink Seven-Up. Contrasting itself to Coke and Pepsi, it proudly called itself the "un-cola."
In my campaign, I proposed making an even-year legislative session "The Unsession." Except for responding to a fiscal or other emergency and passing a bonding bill, the session would be devoted to eliminating unnecessary or redundant laws, rules, and regulations; reducing the verbiage in those that remain; shortening the timelines for developing and implementing them; and undoing anything else, which makes government nearly impossible to understand, operate, or support.
I suggest making next year's legislative session the first "Unsession." After this session is concluded ... on time, in May ... I will ask my agency heads and legislative staff to begin making lists, checking them twice, and working with any legislators, other public officials, and citizens, who wish to spearhead these reforms.
The third component of my balanced budget approach raises state revenues, which will be necessary to eliminate the deficit and still prevent further reductions in the services and assistance that many Minnesotans need.
Raising revenues requires asking someone to pay more taxes. Making taxes fairer requires asking more of those citizens and corporations, who now pay less than their proportionate share.
Few people like paying taxes, even when they're fair. No one likes paying more taxes, even when necessary to make them fair.
But when taxes are unfair ... and remain unfair, not only do the people who are forced to pay more, rightfully resent it; but they also lose faith in their elected officials, who won't change it. Today, more and more hard-working, middle-class Minnesotans believe that the state's tax structure is unfair to them.

And they're right. The facts compiled by the nonpartisan staff at the Minnesota Department of Revenue show that the richest Minnesotans pay less of their incomes in state and local taxes than most other Minnesotans. Large multi-national corporations headquartered here admit their effective tax rates are well below the 9.8% paid by many smaller businesses.
Thanks to the excellent work of Minnesota 2020, I recently became aware of a new study, by the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, which confirms the Department of Revenue's analysis. It found that middle-class Minnesotans pay 26 percent more state and local taxes per dollar of income than do the top one percent of our state's income earners.
When people who have the most pay the least, this state and nation are in trouble. When lobbyists protect tax favors for special interests at the cost of everyone else's best interests, this state and nation are in trouble. My goal is to get us out of trouble.
As I see it, we have three basic budget options.
Plan A is the one I have proposed, or something close to it.
Plan B is to stick with our current tax structure, or something close to it.
Plan C is something better. No one would be happier than me to see a good Plan C. I'm still looking and I'm sure listening. But without one, our choices are between Plans A and B.
Let me briefly address some of my concerns with Plan B, sticking with the status quo. Most of us want stability and certainty in our lives. When confronted with the need for change and its resulting uncertainties, it's human nature to hunker down, hang on, and hope that the established order will return.
Today's reality, however, is that the old order doesn't show any signs coming back. Our state and our nation are engulfed by the new, global economy. We either act now to move ahead, or let ourselves fall behind.
Retaining the current tax structure doesn't even solve our current budget problems; much less advance our state to a better future. It still leaves a $1.1 billion deficit, which I insist must be resolved through honest, responsible measures. It leaves important services severely cut. And it leaves us unable to make the new investments, especially in jobs, economic growth, and education that I believe are essential to a Better Minnesota.
I have a respectful, but strong, disagreement with some of the other elected officials here tonight, about the value of public investments in, and incentives for, economic growth. My father and uncles taught me the paramount importance of continuous private and public investments in improving the communities in which people work and live. In my job, I apply that principle to the "community" of Minnesota.
For two years, my proposals to make capital investments in the downtowns of major cities, like St. Paul, Duluth, Rochester, Mankato, and St. Cloud, and investments in smaller, but equally essential projects throughout Minnesota were rejected by Republican legislative leaders.
Despite a lagging construction industry and good Minnesotans in the building trades unable to find work, they just said No.
Well, just saying No just won't work ... not in Rochester, where the renowned Mayo Clinic wants us to help them continue to outclass their competitors in other states and other countries ... and to continue doing so from Rochester. I thank Mayo, whose CEO Dr. John Noseworthy is with us tonight as a guest of Speaker Thissen, for giving Minnesota this chance to partner with them and help assure their world medical pre-eminence for decades to come ... in Rochester, Minnesota.
Our vitally important agriculture economy is crucial to our state's future. We cannot afford NOT to keep making new investments to support innovation, new production efficiencies, and even greater prosperity. That is why state funding for the Agricultural Growth, Research, and Innovation Program must remain a high priority
I have shared with University of Minnesota President Eric Kaler, who is here this evening, my high priority to return the University's Medical School to the national prominence it has previously achieved; and he has told me that he shares that goal. That turnaround, however, will require public investments.
I have talked with MnSCU Chancellor Rosenstone about the critical importance of his campuses retooling their programs to prepare their students for the jobs of the future. I know that the Chancellor is addressing this imperative. However, revising curricula, modernizing equipment, and upgrading technology all will require public investments.
And I have not even mentioned tonight ... nor does my budget address ... the critical need to invest in improving our highways, roads, and bridges statewide; our public transit systems; our ageing infrastructure; and the list goes on.
We can choose, as others in our positions have before us, to ignore these growing problems, avoid fixing them, and hope they don't crash down upon us, while we're in office.

Or, we can lead. That is what the people of Minnesota elected us to do. That is what they need us to do.
They need us to lead our state forward. Not back to failed ideologies of the past, now masquerading in new jargon. Not remaining locked into what might have worked in the past; but is faltering now, and will likely fail in the future.

It is an awesome responsibility to know that Minnesota's future will depend, in part, on the choices that we are called upon to make.
Those choices will not be easy; and some of them will not be popular. But it is time to prove that Minnesota's leaders are capable of more than ideological skirmishes and political stalemates, which offend our state's citizens and jeopardize our state's future.
This is our time and our responsibility ... to work together and build a state that works.
So, if you're coming to this State Capitol during the next four months, bring your best ideas and your sincere convictions. Bring your work boots and your hard hats. If you're interested in nothing more than throwing rocks and casting blame, send the rest of us a letter ... or a postcard.
But if you really want to pitch in, all the way in, even sacrifice a little of your self-interest for everyone's better interests ... welcome. We need you. Your state needs you.
And please remember always. You're here to serve the best interests of all the people of Minnesota. Not just your clients. Not just your constituents. Not just the people, who agree with you. Or who agree with me.
You are here. I am here. We are all here ... to serve All of Minnesota. To serve the cause of a Better Minnesota.
So, let us begin.

When I ran for Governor four years ago, I promised "A Better Minnesota." Tonight, I can report that the state of our State is better - much better -- than before. It's better for us, and it's better for those who will inherit it from us. But the economic growth and social progress we have achieved, also reminds us of the work we still have left to do.
Becoming a parent introduces a longer-term perspective. We begin to consider the effects of our actions not only on our own lives, but also on lives that will extend beyond ours.
Becoming a grandparent, as I did a year-ago, thanks to my terrific son and wonderful daughterin-law, Eric and Cory Dayton, who are in the gallery tonight, adds another generation to that timeline. It also raises the stakes.
Somewhere down the road, my grandson and his generation will assess the state of the state we have left to them. They will decide whether we, through our actions or inactions, made their lives better. Let's keep them in mind, as we choose our state's path.
In my first State of the State, three years ago, I said, "I know what we must do to create that better future for all of us. To progress, we have to invest.
"We have to invest in more jobs. Invest in better education. In improved transportation. In the health of our citizens, our communities, and our environment. In the transformation of government services."
In other words, we have to invest in growth, quality, and effectiveness.

Well, we invested in jobs. Minnesota's private sector and public sector both invested in jobs. We are blessed with so many outstanding businesses, located everywhere in our state, operating everywhere in the world - and who, during the past three years, rediscovered that they can be successful and profitable here in Minnesota. As a result, we have the 5th fastest growing economy in the country.
There are more than 2.8 million jobs in Minnesota today. More jobs than ever before in our state's history. 150,000 more jobs than when I became Governor three years ago.
This economic growth is happening all over our state. A recent newspaper story was entitled, "Lots of jobs find a home on the prairie in southwestern Minnesota." It said that, for example, Jackson County reported a 5 percent increase in jobs during 2013. The City of Jackson's economic development coordinator is quoted saying that, "Everybody who is able to work, and willing, is probably employed."
Jackson's largest employer, AGCO, has doubled its workforce to more than 1,300. Nearby, HitchDoc, which manufactures automotive and farm equipment for 300 customers, has grown from a dozen employees to 140. "And I'm looking for another 30," said the company's owner, Brad Mohns. "I'm turning down work, because I can't find enough employees."
Some people believe there is no role for government in private sector expansion and job creation. To see that they're mistaken, just look around Minnesota.
There would not be a new stadium under construction in Minneapolis without the financial support of the City and the State of Minnesota. 7500 construction workers will have jobs building that stadium over the next couple years. Over one-third of them will be people of color.
Located right next to the stadium will be a $400 million private sector development, the largest in a generation. It will provide office space for 5000 Wells Fargo employees, residential apartments, stores and shops, a hotel, and a new, two-block public park. Its construction will employ another 1000 Minnesotans. And that is just the beginning of the area's revitalization.
Another new stadium is being constructed in downtown St. Paul. It would not have occurred without an investment by that City and the State of Minnesota. It will anchor the resurgence of the Lowertown Neighborhood in our Capitol City.
Perhaps the most transformative development project anywhere will occur in Rochester, thanks to the world-renowned Mayo Clinic's decision to build its expanded Destination Medical Center there. Already Minnesota's largest private employer, Mayo expects this multi-billion dollar expansion to double its employment over the next twenty years. The Center will be surrounded by new hotels, restaurants, stores, and recreational opportunities.
This project will enhance Rochester's standing, as the premier health care center in the world. It will establish Minnesota as one of the world's best locations for advanced medical research; the development of new medical treatments and technologies; and the thousands of good new jobs they will create. This project would not be happening without Mayo's extraordinary commitment. It would not be happening here in Minnesota without the significant state investment approved by the legislature last year, along with investments by the City of Rochester and Olmsted County.
There are many more successes. Segetis in Hoyt Lakes, Price Mechanical in Maple Grove, AXIS Clinicals in Dilworth, Viracon in Owatonna, Shutterfly in Shakopee, AAR Corporation in Duluth, Toro in Bloomington, Baxter in Brooklyn Park, WFSI in Sauk Rapids, and 3M in Maplewood, all located or expanded their businesses and created jobs all over Minnesota, partly as a result of their financial partnerships with the state and local governments.
There will be many more, if we are smart enough to continue making those investments. But there won't be as many, if we are not.

To illustrate, let's go to Luverne and Worthington, right next to the South Dakota and Iowa borders.
Both cities report opportunities to expand existing businesses and attract new ones. However, they desperately need more water. Without it, business growth is being stifled, new jobs are being lost, and residents are being forced to buy bottled water. Meanwhile, the solution to their water problems, the Lewis & Clark pipeline, is stalled at the Minnesota-South Dakota border, due to lack of public investment.
The federal government has essentially bailed on the project, despite the strenuous efforts of our Minnesota Congressional Delegation. The $71 million needed to complete the pipeline's Minnesota leg must come mostly from us, or that region's growth in population, businesses, and jobs will suffer.
The harsh reality is that there is probably not enough room in an $850 million bonding bill to fund the pipeline's construction all the way through Luverne, into Worthington, and on to the Iowa border. However, there could well be enough room in a larger bonding bill to complete the Minnesota segment and turn the water on in Luverne and Worthington. Otherwise, they will have to wait at least until the next bonding bill, one or two years from now.
Why am I for a $1.2 Billion bonding bill? Because I'm for jobs. Our building this pipeline means jobs now and more jobs in the future. It means this region of our state will have the opportunity to grow and to prosper. Isn't that a purpose we can all support? I hope so.
There are other cities throughout Minnesota, which need the state's financial support to complete key projects that will bring them new businesses, new jobs, new people, and new economic growth. Those job-creating projects will either be funded in this year's bonding bill, or they will lose out again. That decision is yours in the legislature.

Improving education is closely connected with good jobs and economic growth. It is also closely connected with our citizens' health and well-being. I am very pleased to report that we have made significant new investments in education, all the way from early childhood through postsecondary, and improved results are beginning to show.
We started in 2011, when, despite facing a projected $6 Billion deficit, we increased K-12 education funding by $223 million, reversing a decade of declining state support for our public schools.
The 2011 legislature also passed an Alternative Pathway for Teacher Licensure and a "Read Well by Third Grade" literacy initiative. It enacted comprehensive teacher and principal evaluations. Principal evaluations began last fall, and teacher evaluations will start state-wide this September.

Last year, the 2013 legislature made $485 million of new investments in education. It increased the per-pupil aid formula as well as support for Special Education. State funding for early childhood education scholarships was increased to $46 million last year, and the Senate wants to raise that amount this year. Early childhood education is real education reform.
The legislature also passed one of my consistent priorities; and state-funded, all-day kindergarten will begin this fall. Studies show that both early childhood and all-day kindergarten can make crucial differences in boosting students' performances and closing achievement gaps. So do nutritious hot school lunches. No child should be shamed because parents can't afford lunch. Hopefully, that funding will soon be enacted.
And, very significantly, during the past two-and-a-half years, we have repaid ALL of the $2.8 Billion previously borrowed from our schools. Now, school districts can put their money into classrooms, not bank loans. Let us vow that no more will we balance state budgets by creating deficits in school budgets.
Just weeks ago, the legislature passed strong anti-bullying legislation. That is also important education reform. Children don't learn at school, if they are scared. Or made to feel bad about themselves.
Once, Minnesota students competed successfully not only with students around the country, but also with kids around the world. We are on our way to doing that again.
Testing by the Trends in International Math and Science Study ranks Minnesota #9 among world educational systems in Science and 6th in Mathematics.
Back home, in the most recent National Assessment of Educational Progress testing, Minnesota's 4th graders tested #1 in the nation in math. They ranked 10th best in reading, which was a big improvement from 22nd the year before. Very important was that the state's reading gap for African-American and Latino 4th graders closed by 10 points from 2009 to 2013.
Our 8th graders ranked 11th best in the nation in reading and 5th best in math.
We have had the highest ACT scores among seniors for 8 years running, and our graduation rate, nearly 80%, is the highest in a decade.
Regarding higher education, we have started to make progress, but we have quite a ways to go. In fiscal 2012, state support for higher education, in real, after-inflation dollars, fell to its lowest level since 1981. Last year's legislature began to reverse that trend, and increased state funding for higher education by a record $248.5 million.
One result from that declining state funding had been the increased reliance on tuition revenues to fund our public colleges and universities. According to the College Board, in this school year

Minnesota has the 4th highest in-state tuition and fees for two-year public colleges and the 12th highest for four-year colleges and universities. Last year's legislature wisely imposed two-year freezes on tuitions at the University of Minnesota and the MnSCU colleges and universities.
In addition, the State Grant Program was expanded. As a result, over Minnesota 100,000 students have received increased state financial aid this year.

Improved transportation is also essential to support economic growth and a Better Minnesota. Unfortunately, Minnesota's highways, roads, bridges, and public transit systems have been underfunded for the past quarter-century. Federal funds, state gas tax revenues, license fees, and the other traditional sources of transportation funding have not kept pace with escalating project costs.
Every day, Minnesotans everywhere suffer the consequences of that serious underfunding. Congested freeways. Unsafe two-lane highways. Deteriorating roads and bridges. Inadequate public transit systems. Inadequate transportation systems stifle economic growth and cost jobs.
The future of transportation in Minnesota and the funding for it have to be among the 2015 legislative session's top priorities. Whatever is decided -- whether to do nothing, a little, or a lot -- will have an enormous impact on the lives of all Minnesotans - for decades.
Some say that MnDOT should be looking to save money by becoming more efficient. Well, they have. $50 million in construction savings have been identified that can now be used to advance other important projects, such as a much-needed third lane on Highway 494 in Plymouth.
MnDOT officials have also outlined one possible combination of funds, which could nearly raise the $6 Billion of additional revenues needed over the next ten years to maintain, expand, and improve our state's transportation systems. Obviously, it would be very expensive. It would, however, cost less than doing nothing.

A better Minnesota also means a healthier Minnesota. We can take satisfaction in our national ranking as the third healthiest state. And the Commonwealth Fund has just announced that Minnesota ranks as the best state in the country for health system performance, which includes health care access, quality, costs, and outcomes.
I am especially proud that we've expanded access to affordable, high-quality health care, while at the same time reducing state health care costs. The Department of Human Services has saved taxpayers over $1 Billion through more competitive contracts for our state health care programs.
Among the states, we have the fifth lowest percentage of citizens without health insurance coverage. 8 percent of our residents are uninsured, compared to the national average of 14.8 percent. And our state's entire health care network deserves credit for enabling MNsure to offer the lowest insurance rates of any Health Exchange.
These low rates have helped MNsure enroll over 206,000 Minnesotans in affordable health coverage -- many for the first time. MNsure didn't start well, but it's gotten better, and it will keep on improving.
It's also important to remember that the federal Affordable Care Act provides all Minnesotans with some very important protections, whether they obtain their insurance through MNsure or not. No one can be denied coverage, because of pre-existing conditions. There can be no lifetime limit on a person's health care needs. Young adults are covered under their parents' health insurance plans until the age of 26. Certain screenings for cancer and other preventative procedures are free.
Here in Minnesota, we greatly enhanced the well-being of many of our citizens by passing into law last year's Marriage Equality legislation.
However, there is always more that we can do. Better school physical education programs will encourage children and youths to enjoy physical exercise and appreciate its benefits. The Statewide Health Improvement Program (SHIP) helps people of all ages to become healthy and to stay healthy.
Under SHIP, the Cites of Frazee and Fergus Falls have adopted "Complete Streets" policies, making it easier for residents to incorporate physical activity into their daily routines.
In Fairmont, SHIP has helped community leaders create Safe Routes to Schools. They have installed wider crosswalks, additional safety guards, pedestrian and bike safety education, and a "Walking Tuesday" program at four elementary schools.
Farm to school/ Healthier food programs have taken off under SHIP. In just four years, 29 percent of Minnesota's schools have implemented Farm to School strategies, providing access to locally grown fresh fruits and vegetables to more than 272,000 students.
In Kelliher, for example, SHIP has brought healthier food to the public schools with more fresh fruits and vegetables and more local foods. Kelliher's Superintendent reports that for the first time in 20 years, the school's hot breakfast and lunch budgets are in the black. Last year, at this time, they were between $30,000 and $40,000 in the red.
Healthier habits, lower costs and supporting local economies. That's what SHIP is about.
We also need to support caregivers who are taking care of aging parents. My proposed State Income Tax Credit for Child Care costs would apply equally to the costs of care for dependent, disabled, or elderly family members. I urge that this tax credit be included in the second tax bill.


We must also work continuously to improve government services and provide Minnesotans with the quality and the efficiency they deserve. We have made real progress, and we have much more to do.
We've reduced environmental permitting times, as well as the time it takes the Department of Labor and Industry to license plumbers, electricians and other professionals. And DVS's car registration turnarounds have been slashed from 90 to 19 days.
The Department of Veterans Affairs completely reworked their website, allowing the 490,000 people who visit it each year to more easily access information about veterans' benefits and services. The Department of Natural Resources created a one-stop shop for all State Park camping reservations and license purchases. What used to take campers 11 clicks from the DNR home page to reserve a campsite online. Now it takes only two clicks.
Last year, I recommended that this year's legislative session be the "Unsession." The response has been tremendous! Thousands of Minnesota citizens offered ideas to improve state government at the State Fair, on-line, and in-person.
We also received terrific ideas and suggestions from hundreds of State employees. I thank them for their interest and participation. No one knows better how to improve government services than the people who work provide them. I also thank legislators, who added their own initiatives and who have taken valuable time during this short session to give consideration to the 1000 proposals submitted by my administration.
They all have one goal: to create a Better Government for a Better Minnesota. I have already signed 121 provisions into law. They include the first middle-class tax cut bill, which simplifies the preparation of federal and state taxes, saving one and one-half million Minnesota taxpayers time and money.
This work may not grab news headlines, but it is very important. It is what citizens should rightfully expect from their government. It is what I expect.
I ask the legislature tonight to continue this work and pass the remaining Unsession bills.
While we have made great progress toward a Better Minnesota, it should also serve as a reminder of the work left to do. The middle class is still struggling in our state and all over our country. There is still too much poverty and inequality. There is too much uncertainty and anxiety about the future. Of the 145,000 Minnesotans, who are unemployed, over one-fourth have been without jobs for more than 27 weeks. Nationally, that number is more than a third.
We need more jobs that pay enough to raise families; jobs that have good benefits; that offer retirement security; and keep pace with the cost of living. Too many Minnesotans have to work two or three jobs to try to make ends meet.

We took a very important step two weeks ago, when the legislature increased the state's minimum wage and indexed it to inflation. When fully in effect, 325,000 Minnesotans will earn almost $500 million more every year.
At $8.00 per hour effective this August, a worker's earnings will still be one-third below the federal poverty level for a family of four. At $9.50 per hour in two more years, earnings will remain one-fifth below the poverty level.
Nevertheless, those increases will be enormously important to them and their families. They will use that money to give their children better lives. They will use it to buy necessities, and much will be spent quickly and locally. A higher minimum wage leads to more economic growth by rewarding hard work and improving workers' productivity.
In a couple weeks, I will be speaking for the fourth year at the Minnesota Prayer Breakfast. This year, the theme is "Unity." I am going to say that, unfortunately, where I work, unity in an election year is an oxymoron.
But the truth is . . . we're all in the same boat together. We're all in the same rough seas. We can affect much of what occurs here in Minnesota and improve our state. However, we are part of a very big world.
One which is ever more inter-connected and moving very fast.
Today, the U.S. economy comprises 22% of the entire world economy. In 1960, however, the U.S. share was almost 39%.
Other countries' standings in the global economy have also changed. In the last quarter century, Japan's share of the world's GDP has dropped to half of what it was. China's has increased seven times. Germany's share fell by almost half, while Brazil's more than doubled.
What does this mean? That the world economy is very dynamic, with big winners and losers over time. The U.S. economy is still dominant, but other countries are catching up to us. And they don't want to join us; they want to beat us.
The recent serious recession and slow recovery from it evidence a profound economic change. We used to make here most of what we bought here. And we made it better here than anywhere else in the world. That was our overwhelming competitive advantage, which drove our economic dominance and steadily raised the living standards of our growing middle-class.
In past years, it has shifted. The rest of the world now makes much of what we buy here. However, they cannot yet afford to buy enough of the goods and services we produce here, to replace the jobs that we have lost. And we have not created enough new ideas to launch enough new businesses to provide enough new jobs for everyone who wants and needs one.
This intensified global competition will dominate the rest of our lives, our children's and our grandchildren's lives. How we respond will determine the quality of the lives we all live.
Here in Minnesota, we are better prepared than succeed in this new global economy - because of the ingenuity and productivity found everywhere in our state. From our farmers, who have made Minnesota the 4th largest agriculture exporting state in the nation, to our Iron Range mining companies, who have merged new technology with tried and true methods.
Farmers, steel workers, loggers, plant workers, construction crews, teachers, nurses, truck drivers, corporate executives, and public employees. They are living proof that we have always earned our success. By working harder. By managing better. By innovating smarter. By producing more efficiently. Per capita, we have the highest number of Fortune 500 companies headquartered here. 3M. General Mills. Target. United Health Group. They didn't move here. They started here.
Cargill. Marvin. Andersen. Carlson. Digi-Key. Toro. Schwan's. Polaris. Arctic Cat. Magnetation. Medtronic. Mayo. They, and too many others to mention, began with an entrepreneur with an idea. Which became a product or service. Which other industrious people built into other products and services. Which succeeded, because they were designed well, produced well, and serviced well, by well-educated, talented, and hard-working Minnesotans. Working together, they have produced success after success after success. And they have built a state, which reflects their values and virtues.
That was the key to our past success. It will also be the key to our future success. What we have to do for a better future is what we did for a better past. We have to invest. We have to invest in our people. We have to invest in economic growth. We have to invest in a Better Minnesota.

We have to invest in better education. Education that teaches people what they will need to succeed in the world of the future, not the world of the past. We need to invest in their new ideas, in their new ways to solve problems. We need to invest in their better health. We need to invest in a cleaner environment to keep them healthier for longer. And we need to invest in the infrastructure they need to live productive lives: efficient transportation, reliable sewer and water systems, and high-speed world-communications.
We have begun that process by recognizing the critical importance of our investments in education, and reversing their decline. Increasing our commitment to early childhood education will be one key to closing the achievement gap and enabling all of our children to become successful adults. Let us all commit that by 2018, all three and four year olds in Minnesota will have access to quality, affordable early childhood education.
Then, from the beginning of their elementary school educations, we must teach our children how to think creatively. To learn how to learn. To learn to love to learn. Creative people develop new ideas, which start new enterprises, which provide new jobs. Creative people figure out how to do their work more efficiently and productively.

The excessive amounts of time and rote learning required by today's excessive school testing are counter-productive. They stifle teachers' abilities to not only impart information, but also to show kids how to use it. How to apply their knowledge to solve new problems in new areas. And to enjoy doing so.
This approach does not require abandoning testing, as a measure of each student's progress. It does require more efficient, more effective testing. A growing number of elementary schools in Minnesota are applying "one-minute, read-out-loud" tests, which can determine reading levels in just that one minute. Such tests can be repeated throughout the school year, as often as necessary, to measure students' progress and adjust learning strategies accordingly.
Compare that approach to the high-stakes, anxiety-provoking testing, which is now imposed on children in third grade - or even younger. Many children come to school terrified on test days; then go home demoralized. What purpose does it serve to send a third-grader home believing she has failed life, because she may have performed poorly on a test?
Last year, I'm very sorry to say, our state went backwards. More tests were mandated in the upper grade levels. I'm told some tests are required by state statute. Others are necessary to satisfy federal requirements. Still others are added by local school districts. They may make sense individually; but added all together, they do not.
I am asking our Department of Education to prepare for the 2015 legislative session an analysis all of the tests now required at each grade level. And to recommend which ones could be streamlined, combined, or eliminated. I urge next year's legislators to work with state and national experts to reduce the amount of school testing and allow dedicated teachers to spend their time teaching students what they will need for their future success.
Minnesota offers one of the fewest school days per school year in the country. The amount of time students spend in classrooms each day has also declined. Next year's legislature needs to re-evaluate those practices. The rigors of the school day and the school year are important ways to prepare young people for the far more competitive world they will enter.
We also need to consider what environments we offer young people, when they're not in school. It pains me to drive by a school in the early afternoon and see it closed, with its playground locked up. I always wonder, "Where are the kids, who are locked out of their schools? Where do they go, when they have nowhere to go?"
We need our schools to open earlier to offer their students nutritious breakfasts, and we need them to stay open later to provide safety, mentoring, tutoring, exercise, and new learning opportunities. These additional responsibilities would not be placed upon schools' regular teachers. Instead, a new group of adults would take over after regular hours.
Minnesota has the third highest labor force participation rate in the country: over 70 %. Too many of their sons and daughters have too little to do after school and no one watching them do it. Afternoon and evening programs at schools and recreational centers should be community responsibilities. Ask local businesses to help pay for them. Ask major corporations to sponsor them. Ask adults to volunteer one day a week or a month to run them. Get everyone involved in the lives of our children.
Starting in Junior High School, our education system needs to make students aware of the real world opportunities and pitfalls in the world they will be entering. First and foremost, they need to hear again and again and again that continuing their educations will be absolutely essential to achieving the lives they want. Our schools need more guidance counselors, who are specially trained in career guidance, to help junior high and high school students better understand what their opportunities are and how to prepare for them.
Then we must better align our high school and college curricula with the world of the future, not the world of the past. This means we have to provide leading-edge instruction; in world-class schools, colleges, and universities; with state-of-the-art equipment and technology -- all aligned with the good jobs that will be available for their graduates.
The need for this alignment is well-understood by our state's secondary and post-secondary education leaders. However, they need the resources to carry it out.
The State's current bonding levels do not adequately support the improvements that both MnSCU and the U of M must make in their existing physical plants, in new buildings, and in state-of-the-art equipment and technologies -- to continue to attract the best students and give them the best possible educations.
Higher education is by no means alone in suffering from inadequate capital investments. We need to find new revenues to finance.
I have given special emphasis to education, both because I believe it holds the key to our continued growth. I am convinced that whoever retools their education systems to align most effectively with the world their students will live in, and gives them the tools they will need to succeed in it, will prosper. Whoever doesn't, will lag behind.

We also need to increase our investments in new jobs and better jobs throughout our state. Last year, the legislature made major new investments in the Department of Employment & Economic Development's job creating programs. I thank Speaker Thissen and Majority Leader Bakk for their excellent leadership, and I thank all the legislators of both parties who supported those new incentives.
They are already putting more Minnesotans to work. Since last July, the Minnesota Investment Fund has provided companies with low-interest loans totaling $8.4 million, which have leveraged $235 million in private investment.
In January, the new Minnesota Job Creation Fund was launched. It provides pay-for-performance incentives for businesses to locate or expand here. In its first four months, the program has invested $5 million in 10 different business expansion projects (five in Greater Minnesota and five in the Metro area). It has leveraged $87 million of new, private investments, which have created 550 new jobs.
For this session, I proposed an expansion of our Angel Tax Credit program, our State's primary tool to attract private investments into promising business start-ups and growth. They have the potential to become Minnesota's next Fortune 500 companies. Whether they become large or remain small, their success will drive Minnesota's future economic growth.
As I will say at the Prayer Breakfast, Unity may be beyond our reach at the Capitol this year. I don't want to rule it out entirely, with second tax cut, supplemental budget, and bonding bills still ahead. We might surprise ourselves.
But while we may not find a Unity of Means, I believe we do share a Unity of Purpose. We all love this state. We all want to see it prosper. We want our International communities - there are now over 100 languages and dialects spoken in Minnesota - to retain their special identities; yet, also live together harmoniously and work together productively.
We want Minnesota to be the Best. To be the very best it can possibly be. Because we live here. Many of our children and grandchildren will live here. We want them to achieve the very best they can for themselves and for their families.
In his epic saga Giants in the Earth, O. E. Rolvaag wrote, "By attempting the impossible, they accomplished the unbelievable."
Unity of purpose might seem impossible. But if we try, it might just show up, when we really need it. Today is the 150th anniversary of Confederate General Robert E. Lees surrender at Appomattox Court House, which is marked as the end of the American Civil War. It is thus a fitting time to recognize the heroic service of over 24,000 Minnesotans, who fought in that war, and especially the over 2,200 of them, who lost their lives from their service in it.

In his book, entitled The Last Full Measure, Minnesota author, Richard Moe, portrayed soldiers in the First Minnesota Regiment, who sacrificed themselves heroically to protect the Union Armys position during the Battle of Gettysburg in 1863. He described them as: Ordinary young men, who did extraordinary things.

They were called upon by President Abraham Lincoln to help Save the Union. They left their families and homes, suffered unimaginable hardships and horrors, risked their lives, and some gave their lives, to preserve this country for the generations who followed.

We are not being called upon to make such extreme sacrifices. Yet, during the remaining six weeks of this legislative session, we will face our own moments of truth: Will we do what is easy, safe, and popular; or will we risk our political lives to preserve this great state for future generations?

May the First Minnesotas courage inspire us. For right now, we have a rare moment of great opportunity. The state of our state is good. Not everywhere. Not for everyone. But overall, Minnesota is doing better than it has for some time, and Minnesota is doing better than most other states. 

What we have been doing is working. Minnesota is working. Our unemployment rate is an unusually low 3.7%. In fact, according to Pew Trusts research, Minnesota is the only state in the nation, whose employment rate for 25-54 year-olds in 2014 exceeded its pre-recession level in 2007. 

More Minnesota businesses are expanding. So, more Minnesotans are working. They are earning more money, which means they are paying more taxes.

It is that growth in employment, incomes, and profits, not tax increases, that has caused our states biennial budget forecast to go from a $6.2 billion deficit in 2011 to a $1.9 billion surplus today. Income tax rates that apply to 98% of Minnesotans, have remained the same, since I took office. About 2 billion of the $2.1 billion tax increase was paid by the states wealthiest 2% of households, large corporations, and increased tobacco taxes. Those revenues went to cover a projected $627 million deficit and to pay off the $2.8 billion owed our school districts. Then, last year, 2 million Minnesotans received over $500 million in tax cuts.

So, let me repeat: It is Minnesotas economic successes, not tax increases, that have produced our present budget surplus.

When it comes to economic success, Minnesota is unique. In most states, a budget surplus is applauded. Going from a deficit to a surplus is seen as a sign that the state is heading in the right direction -- that policymakers are doing things right  so keep it up. 

But not in Minnesota. Here, some people say the reason we have a budget surplus is because were doing things wrong.

They say things like: Taxes are too high. They are bloating state revenues, fueling excessive government spending, driving successful businesses and individuals away, and ruining our future.

I have heard that complaint many times, throughout the 38 years I have been involved in Minnesota government. If we have a budget deficit, its because taxes are too high. If theres a surplus, taxes are too high. Whatever is wrong with Minnesota, taxes are too high.

However, many national experts view our states economic policies and results far more positively than do our in-state critics.

This year, Politico Magazine ranked Minnesota as The Best American State.

Forbes Magazine ranked Minnesota second for Quality of Life, third for Best Place to Make a Living and the ninth Best State for Business.

A group called Michigan Future, led by some of that states top business and philanthropic leaders, issued a report: State Policies Matter: How Minnesotas Tax, Spending and Social Policies Help it Achieve the Best Economy Among Great Lakes States.

The report concluded: There is no question Minnesota is a high-tax state.  But it has largely invested that additional revenue in services and investments that matter in a knowledge-based economy. An educated workforce, efficient transportation systems, vibrant cities and metropolitan areas, and a secure safety net for those making the transition to a global economy, all matter in creating a prosperous state.

Closer to home, recent state newspaper headlines have proclaimed:

Manufacturing expansions in Minnesota are booming, creating jobs.

More Minnesota manufacturers say they're 'thriving.'

New Product Orders, Hiring Surge in Minnesota.

And, Outstate economies are first to recover from the recession.

As I have said before, the credit for this success belongs to the people of Minnesota. To the business owners and executives, who have chosen to locate and expand here, because they found it profitable to do so. To their hard-working, productive employees, who helped make those decisions successful. To the teachers, professors, and other educators, who provide, overall, the best educations to the most students of any state in the country, as proven again by our top ACT scores for the 9th straight year. To the doctors, nurses, state and local government workers, service providers, lawyers, accountants, computer science experts, and other professionals and their dedicated support staffs.

Unfortunately, our states successes are seldom acknowledged inside this building. Its inhabitants are too preoccupied with assigning blame for real and imagined shortcomings. So, I want to take this opportunity to recognize the accomplishments of the people of Minnesota. And to say, Thank You. You are remarkable citizens. You have achieved extraordinary successes, which have boosted our state to its place today.

Besides reflecting the truth, a recognition of our states overall success has other benefits. It puts in proper perspective the assessments of our shortcomings, inequities, and areas needing improvement. We still have an unacceptable gap in academic achievement among students of color. There is a widening disparity between the stagnant incomes of middle-class Minnesota families and the wealthiest. Our workplace policies are not giving families the flexibility they need to balance work responsibilities with family responsibilities. The number of people, who depend upon our public healthcare programs, and those programs costs, continue to escalate. Both the quality and the capacity of our highway, road, bridge, and public transit systems continue to deteriorate. Our state and federal Constitutions still do not provide Minnesotans with gender equality under the law.

There are also industries in our state, areas of our state, and groups of people with unmet needs. Over 1100 workers at two U.S. Steel plants on the Iron Range are facing imminent layoffs of unknown durations. Minnesota turkey growers have already lost several hundred thousand birds due to an unusual strain of Avian flu. Increasing numbers of our children lack adequate physical protections, emotional support, and alternative homes. They, and others, need and deserve our help. With a $2 billion budget surplus, we can afford to help.

Acknowledging our states overall success also provides more realistic guidance for future decisions, by reframing the debate. Refocused properly, its not: What must we do to save our state from disaster? To: What can we do to create an even better future? As I said before, we have a unique opportunity right now, to dedicate our budget surplus to areas of continuing need or to areas that were previously overlooked. 

By illustration, during my 2010 campaign, I proposed that our state fund all-day kindergarten for all Minnesota children. Some questioned school districts interest in providing it; others questioned the need for it; and still others questioned its cost. Finally, in 2013, it passed the legislature, and I signed it into law. At the time, only 54 percent of Minnesotas five year-olds were enrolled in a free, all-day kindergarten program. For many of the rest, their parents were paying as much as $4,200 a year to defray the cost. This year, thanks to state funding, 99.6% of Minnesotas five year olds are in all-day kindergarten classes, being offered in all but one of our states 954 public elementary school sites.

I thank the school boards, superintendents, principals, teachers, and parents, who responded so enthusiastically and overwhelmingly to this opportunity. And I thank every legislator here tonight, who voted two years ago to make it possible. I expect the reason you seek your job, as do I, is to make lasting improvements in the lives of the people you serve. Well, this time we did, in the lives of young Minnesota children, now and for years to come.

I am frequently asked, What are my top priorities in this session? My simple, straight answer is: Everything. Closing the Achievement Gap; Buffer Zones for Better Water Quality and Wildlife Habitat; Tougher Penalties on Poachers; The Increased Funding requested by the Chief Justice for the Judicial Branch; Completion of the Lewis & Clark Water Project; Final Capitol Restoration; funding for broadband, and all the rest. I would not have proposed any of them, if I didnt believe they were important to a Better Minnesota.

At the very top, however, are education and transportation. They are essential to our future. So, let me go back to education, where I just left off.

In my budget request for the next biennium, I have proposed spending an additional $694.6 million above the February Forecasts base amount for E-12 education in FY 16-17. In its targets, the Senate has proposed a $361.5 million increase above that base; the House $156.7 million.

A question I hear about my budget proposal is, More money for education? But we spend so much already.

Its true that we have significantly increased state funding for K-12 education, since I took office. And I emphasize the word, WE. In my first term, the legislature, under both Republican and DFL control, increased state funding for the Per-Pupil Aid Formula, for the Read Well by Third Grade initiative, for Special Education, for School Lunches and for the start of free Elementary School Breakfasts. ALL were enacted with bi-partisan support. So, understandably, some people are asking, Havent we done enough?

However, the most recent Census Bureau report on Public Education Finances ranks Minnesota 24th among the states in Per-Pupil Expenditures for K-12 Education. Our recent increases have lifted our standing, but our financial commitment to educating our children is just average, compared with other states. Just average is not nearly good enough. 

We have the 11th highest per-capita income among the states. A rank of 24th in per-pupil K-12 education expenditures by a state with the 11th highest per-capita income means that at least thirteen other states are making greater financial efforts than we are to educate our children.

The previous decades cuts in education funding are still taking their toll. We can be proud of our bi-partisan improvements over the past four years; but its not a reason to stand still. Or to slide backward.

I have also proposed a major new early childhood education initiative to fund pre-kindergarten classes for all of our states four year-olds. Taken on its own, this proposal has the power to transform the trajectory of Minnesotas youngest learners. But my proposal doesnt stop there. I am also proposing significant increases in childcare assistance, elimination of the Head Start waiting list, funding for home visiting, more resources to continue building the quality of childcare through Parent Aware, and expanded tax credits to parents for the costs of their child. In the education budget area alone, I am proposing $372 million in additional funding to care for and educate our states children between the ages of 0 to 4 years-old.

I strongly urge the groups now fighting over how that additional funding should be allocated to work cooperatively with the legislature to find the best solution. In my view, its not either/or. Its both.

At the other end of the education continuum, higher education: the University of Minnesota, the MnSCU colleges, and universities, and state financial aid for students are equally deserving of increased support. In 2013, the legislature approved a $249 million increase in higher education funding for the current biennium. That increase, however, only replaced the $246 million reduction enacted in 2011.

In real, inflation-adjusted dollars, state support for higher education in FY 2012 dropped to its lowest level in over thirty years. No wonder tuitions have been forced higher and higher in both systems, causing Minnesota students to graduate with the fifth highest average debt loads in the country.

The tuition freezes we enacted for last year and this year at the MnSCU and U of M campuses were important steps toward reducing the hardships that high tuitions impose on Minnesota students and their families; but they were only first steps. I am proposing those tuition freezes be continued into the next two years. I also ask the legislature to support needed increases in the states financial aid programs for Minnesota students.

In both my regular budget and bonding bill proposals, I am advocating for increased state support for upgrading the Universitys Medical School, its Veterinary Research, for new MnSCU programs, as well as $70 million to each system for badly needed repairs on campuses throughout the state. We need those improvements to offer world-class postsecondary educations in world-class facilities. Without them, we wont be competitive in attracting the students we need for our states future vitality.

I also urge legislators to work even more closely with the Universitys and MnSCUs boards, administrators, faculties, and my administration, to identify Minnesota employers unmet needs for graduates with specialized skills and determine how best to meet them. I ask each legislator to bring business leaders together with higher education administrators in her or his district; find out how well those campuses are providing the training needed for present and future workforces; and bring solutions to this and future legislative sessions.

The Chief Executive Officers of so many companies have told me that the number one reason why they chose to expand here rather than in other states was the quality of Minnesotas workforce, which is also directly related to the quality of their educations. However, the future superiority of our workforce and their productivity is in no way guaranteed. It must be continuously earned.

These and other education initiatives are critically important for many reasons. The quality of our state is, and will be, determined primarily by the quality of our citizens, which will be influenced strongly by the quality of their educations.

All sorts of social measures  from better health, to higher productivity, to lower crime rates  are strongly correlated with levels of educational attainment. The amount of legislative funding for improved education, all the way from early childhood through postsecondary, will measure your commitments to our states future. 

My second top priority for this legislative session is to begin to improve our states aging and inadequate transportation systems, by increasing investments in better highways, roads, bridges, and public transit. For the past twenty-five years, those investments lagged behind what was needed to maintain them, much less to improve them.

I am very pleased that both the Senate and the House have recognized the necessity to make these critically important improvements. However, we still need to reach agreements on the amounts of those investments and how to assure they will continue reliably over the next decade.

It is tempting to allocate a significant amount of the current surplus to fund transportation projects. However, we are unlikely to see surpluses of this magnitude in future years, given the slower pace of this national economic recovery and its vulnerability to unforeseeable world events. Whatever future national economic growth does occur, will likely be less than that experienced in the post-World War II decades, before the Great Recession.

Thus, reallocating General Fund dollars to pay for essential transportation improvements will inevitably pit those needs against educating our children; caring properly for for our elderly; enhancing our natural resources; fulfilling the important promises of the Working Parents Act; and providing quality, affordable health care for all our citizens.

People should not be pitted against projects. Both are too important.

There are other needed infrastructure improvements throughout our state. Our budget surplus provides us with opportunities to invest in better public buildings; athletic and cultural facilities; advanced communication networks; water quality and wildlife habitat improvements; and state parks and trails, all of which make vital contributions to our states quality of life. They enhance our appeal to current retirees, Baby Boomer near-retirees, Generation Xers, Millennials, and generations still unnamed -- all of whom will ask themselves: What does this state offer to me? To my family? My career success? My recreation? My safety? And so much more.

Talented, successful people can choose where they want to live. We are in competition for them with the rest of our country and the rest of the world. It would be, as the old saying goes: Penny Wise and Pound Foolish, not to increase our investments in a Better Minnesota by passing a bonding bill this year.

Some people are telling us to Just wait until next year for my $842 million bonding bill. That just doesnt make sense. Interest rates remain low; we have capacity for the debt service within existing guidelines; and many of those and other improvements are urgently needed.

How can we tell the citizens and businesses in Worthington to just wait another year for a reliable supply of safe drinking water? Or tell people in Willmar to wait another year before rerouting rail cars with volatile fuels away from their city; or St. Cloud area residents to wait another year for public safety improvements to the nearby correctional facility?

The legislature has passed a bonding bill in 31 of the past 32 sessions  in both even- and odd-numbered years. Waiting now, for another year, is inexplicable and should be unacceptable.

I am also unwilling to wait another year  or longer  for legislation that will significantly improve Minnesotas water. Some lakes, rivers, and streams all over our state have become dangerously polluted  so bad that fish cant live in them and people shouldnt swim in them. One Minnesotan living in a town providing free bottled water to its residents after its water treatment plant malfunctioned, said, thats just the way it is, living here.

I disagree. That should not be just the way it is, living anywhere in Minnesota. No one person or industry is responsible for our states deteriorating water quality; but every one of us is responsible for improving it.

Yet, the headline in this weeks Outdoor News reads: Buffer Bill has No Future in this legislative session. I find that hard to believe and impossible to accept. You ARE the bills future. Passing it is your responsibility.

If all the interest groups, who oppose my bill, spent half as much time improving it as they do criticizing it, it would have passed already. My initial proposal is condemned for being One size fits all. Well then, tell us how many sizes, in what shapes, as determined by whom, will fit all?

Everyone professes to want clean water. Too many, however, dont want to do whats necessary to get it. And everyone means not just farmers, but also municipalities, industries, landowners, and everyone else. Its time for all of us to work together to pass a bill this session that will protect our citizens from polluted water.  

In closing, our continued success wont just happen. We must make it happen. We must invest what we have now to improve what we do have. And to correct whats missing.

That wont happen by distributing our surplus to each of our constituents. Thats what a corporate board does, when theyre breaking up the enterprise. They cash it out, distribute it to their stockholders, close the doors, and go home.

Minnesotas success will continue, if we do what successful farmers, business owners, homeowners, and other franchise owners do  pool our resources, invest them wisely, and create an even more prosperous future.

We will be judged by what we do. This is our moment of truth. Minnesotas future is now in our hands. How will future historians judge our wisdom, our innovation, and our courage? I believe historians will judge us the way we, as parents, judge ourselves: have we passed onto our children the opportunities for a better life? Are we leaving Minnesota a better place for our children  a state with more opportunities, an even better natural environment, and an education that ensures that each of our children will have a real chance for success? Over the next six weeks, we will answer those questions. I want our answer to be yes  we leave the children of Minnesota that chance for a better life. 