Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislature, the Judiciary, Constitutional

Officers, and Citizens of Minnesota.

1. Welcome, not only to a new Session, but a renewed capitol. With these  updated facilities and with standing committees having been holding weekly
sessions, you will have an opportunity to test whether 120 days is now ample time to accomplish the necessary business.
I appear before you for two reasons. I want to, and I am instructed to. The Minnesota Constitution says: The Governor shall communicate by message
to each Session of the Legislature such information touching the State and
condition of the country as he may deem expedient.

1968 was a year short on joy and long on violence and sorrow. A year in

which we saw the fantastic success of Apollo VIII and the seizure of universities by militants, the tragedy of Chicago, the paralysis of New York, and the

slaying of a national leader and a presidential candidate. It was a year which brought almost more history than a people can bear.

We meet today at a time when the world seems cruel and often absurd. Many of our people are cynical, disillusioned, frustrated, bitter. Other nations doubt us we doubt ourselves.
The public looks to governmental institutions and sees scores of federal
programs which haven't really made the dent on poverty and hunger that was
intended. It hears about the passage of glamorous programs, then learns they haven't been funded. The American people agonize as their sons die in Viet

Nam while negotiators in Paris quibble about the shape of a table.


Large numbers of students are legitimately frustrated with educational
institutions that sometimes get in the way of learning. A smaller but more
vocal group on campuses from Columbia to Oshkosh to San Francisco seek not to
change the system but to destroy it.
Some adults, questioning the religious institution, are disrupting their
worship services, and a good share of the young never even bother to go.
Whether you look at government, education, religion or business, the
11 pressure and strain on these institutions has brought them to the breaking
point.
For too long we've been worshipping their great empty forms, forgetting
to see if their spirit was dying. For too many aLmost 70% of all Americans 1969 doesn't look much
 different or looks worse than 1968 because our institutions seem uninter-
ested or incapable.
Our people cry out for systems that serve the individual first and solve his problems best. If we should fail to hear that plea or neglect it, we as a people are in deep trouble. Then there is no hope for this nation, no future for democracy. Either in a fit of rage and passion we can demolish our institutions, or we can recognize that individuals renew institutions. Individuals with the
courage to ask "Does the system serve?" and "Whom does it serve?" Individuals with the creativity and energy to answer, "How it can serve." Given the resolve for service, we can fashion the kind of society our forefathers could only dream of.
" I am confident we have such men. For over 175 years, the U.S. has been bombarded with problems. Yet our people have marched through history with a sense of purpose and a hope in tomorrow. They were a strong people who saw
in America a vision of greatness. We, too, have that strength. If we did not, surely there would have been no Apollo VIII. To me, this is an exceptional time to be alive. Maybe not the best of times that may be too much to ask but certainly an open and exciting

time

a time of opportunity.

We, like our forebears, are genuinely committed to solving the problems

of the past and easing the problems of the present. But in addition, for the first time in history, a people have wholeheartedly assumed the arduous task
of trying to anticipate and avoid the problems of the future. Part of the reason our problems seem so king-sized, so overwhelming, is
,I not because we as a people are less able to deal with them than our predecessors, but precisely because we are perhaps one of the most sincerely dedicated problem-

solving generations that has ever emerged. We are trying to solve more at one
time than any other generation. Therefore, the issue before America is can we renew our institutions so
they advance, not get in the way of, our commitment.

We, in these halls, are charged with a special responsibility to the institution of government. It is our challenge to seek to restore the people's

faith in the capacity of government to respond to the public's will, and sense its need. The issue before us is simple. Can we re-think, adapt, innovate,
and streamline the institution of government to fully equip it to solve today's I problems and tomorrow's demands? I believe we can.
We demonstrated two years ago by such acts as creating a Metropolitan

Council, a Department of Human Rights, a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, a modernized Department of Economic Development, an accelerated highway program, and many others that State Government can meet modern needs. But we cannot, and I am sure we will not, rest on past achievements. We must demonstrate again this Session that we will not coast. We will take another gigantic step forward in this Decade of Decision.
That step will require action on such important subjects as reorganizing the Executive Branch of State Government, combatting crime, fully guarding the consumer, enhancing our environment, guaranteeing quality education, improving safety and health services, encouraging sound metropolitan development, increasing job opportunities and safety, aiding agriculture, promoting hmnan rights and helping our Senior Citizens. 

Consequently, the first special message I shall send to you will outline the reorganization of the Executive Branch of State Government. No wonder the public is frustrated by the organization of State services. If a man seeks vocational rehabilitation services, there. is a myriad of separate programs scattered throughout five major state agencies. And the frustration for the man who deals with the government occasionally compounds to a mammoth headache for us who work in government daily.
The present structure of the Executive Branch of State Government is an administrative puzzle built by happenstance. Right now, under the jurisdiction of the Governor, there are 84 executive offices, agencies, boards and commissions, some with administrative, quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial authority, or all three. Furthermore, there are 108 advisory bodies, 80 intra-state regional or

interstate bodies, and 11 semi-state or state-related boards or commissions. That means 283 groups that are individually and directly responsible to the Governor.
The reorganization of the Executive Branch is essential to providing efficiency, service and accountability to the people.
Given the effective tools for problem solving, we can set about to prove to our people that a government of, by and for the people really works.
see no reason why this State Government should not be a national leader in rebuilding our people's faith in government in its ability to perform. But the only way to merit their trust is to solve their problems.
Therefore, let me briefly discuss the major problem areas we face this Session.

To my mind and to the minds of Minnesotans, one of the first and fundamental responsibilities of State and Local Government is to protect our people from fear. Fear that comes from:
A burglary every 20 minutes, An auto theft every hour, A robbery every three hours, An aggravated assault every five hours, A forcible rape almost every day. Those are Minnesota statistics. Therefore, I serve notice today on those who prey upon their fellow citizens that law enforcement is a prime and constant concern of this Administration.

That is why we formed the Governor's Crime Commission. That is why those 102 men and women have worked so earnestly. That is why you will be receiving a special message. The message will be detailed and comprehensive, covering crime prevention, law enforcement, and administration of justice, and corrections. 

Another special message shall be presented on a topic of vital interest to every Minnesotan safeguarding the consumer. It will cover a range of legislation directed to inform and safeguard the consumer. I urge your thorough consideration and early passage of sound laws to implement reorganization, to fight crime and to provide consumer protection.
As I said earlier, this generation is unique in its commitment to not only trying to ease the problems of the past and present, but for the first time earnestly striving to avoid problems in the future. 


Nowhere is this particular characteristic more obvious than in the issue of enhancing our environment.
Minnesota has a chance to enhance and cleanse its environment before it is too late. Other states have not been so lucky. The challenge of this Administration and this Session is to save our natural resources.
A. Minnesota's Crystal Waters Program Look first at our water resources. As the land of 15,000 lakes, the
source of the Mississippi, and the western shores of the Great Lakes, with three million acres of water, we don't have much choice. To desecrate our

waters is to destroy our State.

1. The accelerated construction of sewage treatment facilities

would have a tremendous impact on saving pure waters. This is a race against

time. Money spent now would save millions of dollars in inflated construction

costs of facilities which must be built later and save additional millions in

the cost of reclamation projects to restore polluted water.

Right now, nearly Fifty-five Million Dollars of treatment plant

construction is ready to go, on the basis of the community paying 70% of the

cost and the Federal Government 30%. Fifteen Million plus has been authorized

by the Federal Government for its share but only Four Million plus has been

appropriated. The whole program has come to a halt. We cannot wait upon the

fancies and defaults of the Federal Government. This State can and should

act now

not only to aid those now marking time but others who are ordered

to install facilities 

Therefore, I recommend a statewide bonding program to aid local

communities with 30% of construction costs. State funds would be a grant to

municipalities unless or until the Federal Government appropriates sufficient

money to fully fund the presently authorized program. At that time, federal

funds coming to the municipality will reimburse the State.

In the coming Biennium, we will willingly and confidently invest

over Seven Hundred Million Dollars for current expenses for education. Certainly

we can afford a Twenty Million Dollar Bonding program to be repaid over a 20-year

period with the likelihood of substantial federal reimbursement which would

enable us to avoid the catastrophic contamination of our environment. This is

the first part of a four-part Minnesota Crystal Waters Program.

2. In the second part of the crystal Waters Program, the State guarantees responsible lakeshore and lake use regulations to preserve the beauty and life of our lakes.
3. The third recommendation authorizes a study and demonstration project for reclaiming polluted lakes.
4. The last proposal of the Crystal Waters Program requires the consolidation of water resource management now distributed among eight water . related boards into one major state agency.
B. In addition, with greater leisure time for more people to use our natural resources, a conservation-education coordinator is urgently needed to incorporate into the curriculum instruction in wild life values and environmental preservation and acquaint teachers with essential elements of such a program.
But I think we would be the first to admit that not all of the problems of our environment nor its potential for development have been thoroughly explored.
We had five million visits to our State Parks last year. We are just beginning to appreciate the tremendous economic and recreational and historic significance that the Voyageurs National Park will have in Minnesota. The proposal for a Voyageurs National Park, which had received endorsement from the legislatively created Outdoor Recreation and Resources Commission, was introduced as a bill in the last session of Congress. The bill had the support of the entire Minnesota Congressional delegation and will be reintroduced and pushed this session.
We need an intensive study with an early due date on the following three important environmental questions. C. To determine the feasibility of a summer arts facility set in one of
Minnesota's unique natural sites for the study and performance of the visual and performing arts.
D. To analyze the possibilities of a user fee for public waters, which would be a State charge for the use, appropriation or contamination of State waters, be they lakes, streams, or underground systems.
E. To determine a State policy on the funding of dam reconstruction. Many dams constructed in the 1930's are in need of extensive and expensive repair. A State policy on the funding and reconstruction of dams is necessary.
F. Lastly, I urge you to design a program to save space precious space. I strongly recommend a Ten Million Dollar statewide bonding program to fill out some of our existing State Parks and to acquire open space for future recreational uses. Care should be taken that any such acquisition program should be closely coordinated with appropriate planning authority in the area such as the Metropolitan Council in the metropolitan area.
With such a comprehensive program to enhance our environment, we can make sure that in the year 2000 our children can enjoy Minnesota's vast natural resources. It is not too soon to plan for the year 2000. One-half of the people living in Minnesota now will not have reached their fiftieth birthday at the turn of the century. 

Another major challenge of the 1969 Session is improving the quality of education offered to our young people.
The importance of education is obvious. No man is free in any meaningful sense of the word until his mind is free. Then his choices are open, his reach limitless. Little wonder a stable democracy is predicated on a sound education.
Historically, Minnesotans have honored that concept with a tremendous educational investment. During the last two years, we built over 3,330 classrooms, put 417 needy students in college on a new state scholarship program, and saw a 141% increase in the number of people served by vocational rehabilitation, and had the lowest drop-out rate in the nation. In fact, the appropriation for education in this biennium totaled more than the entire state budget just seven years ago.
But we aren't about to rest on our laurels. We can expand the opportunity for education, improve the quality of education, and refine the structure of the educational system.
In pursuit of those goals, I recommend: A. Expanding the State's investment in our young people by a tenfold
increase in our state scholarship program and giving our Indian scholarship program the biggest increase in its history.
B. Strengthening the Higher Education Coordinating Commission by giving it a more prominent role in placing programs and locating new facilities, reviewing budgets and enlarging citizen representation.
C. Granting planning funds for new junior colleges. The Higher Education Coordinating Commission has recommended six new junior colleges be built. Manifestly, they cannot all be constructed in one biennium. We must move now to ease the enormous enrollment pressures on our junior colleges.
D. Since we have committed ourselves to trying to avoid problems in the future, we must realize that behind tomorrow stands not only a problem

but a possible catastrophe. Sixteen percent of our elementary and secondary

students are presently being educated in non-public schools. The enrollment

in private schools had steadily increased for decades until 1963. Since 1963,

the enrollment has dropped 20%, 20% in five years.

Private colleges educated 34% of our students ten years ago, today it is

22%. The result is an immediate, sometimes intolerable burden on the taxpayer,

who must then provide many more public facilities, teachers and administrators.

Consequently, I recommend either a legislative or executive committee be

established and funded to determine the impact the decline of private schools

will have on the taxpayer and to recommend alternate courses for State action.

E. Certain school districts face peculiar circumstances such as

loss of tax base or a rapidly growing student enrollment which outstrips the

tax base. Therefore, to tailor the assistance to the need, consideration

should be given to enlarging the category of special aid to school districts

encountering unusual problems beyond their control.

F. Teacher retirement benefits have always been a weak spot. To

solve the pressing needs of the present and to meet the inflation and changing

conditions of the future, a plan for improvement has been recommended by the

Legislative Commission on Public Employee Retirement Systems with approval by

State teachers' organizations. I endorse that plan and request its early

enactment.

am dedicated to the quality of education and firmly committed to seeing

our young people profit by it. My budget message shall reflect my best judgment

on how we can strike the proper. balance between the desirable and the doable.

The fifth issue Minnesotans are putting before this Legislature will be a
true test of government's problem solving ability. If we honestly commit
ourselves to solving problems, we cannot weasel out of the tough ones.
The gap between our performance and our potential in securing the health
and safety of our people is a cruel and intolerable contradiction. We know more and more about the ugly effects of drug abuse and yet last
year, examinations by the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension on suspected narcotics
violations were up 160% over 1967.
We know more about highway safety and last year we set a new record in
highway deaths. We know more about family medicine but have fewer family doctors.
The time is long overdue for this State to commit itself to a broadscale
program to secure the health and safety of our people. Therefore, I ask you to
consider:
A. The creation of a central state source to collect and disseminate information for drug education. Such a central agency would also coordinate
and integrate the volunteer activities of several interested disciplines
pharmacy, pharmacology, medicine, law, sociology, psychology.
B. I strongly urge action to provide more general medical practitioners
in Minnesota. C. I ask the Higher Education Coordinating Commission to explore the
possibility of expanding programs to train paramedical personnel in our junior
colleges and vocational technical schools.
We must continue to move forward in our efforts to care for the retarded in the context of his own community. During the 1967-68 biennium, there was an increase of 125% in the number of mentally retarded served by day care centers. In my budget message I shall strongly recommend a greatly expanded appropriation for day care centers and sheltered workshops. In addition, in order that we may move effectively in the direction of community care for the mentally retarded, I also request this Legislature require all school districts to conduct a census of all school age children
E. My budget message will reflect my concern for the care of the mentally ill in our institutions, as well as stronger support for mental health centers.
F. I will also recommend an increased appropriation for the proper care of the blind and the deaf.
A source of constant heartache to me is our daily death toll on the highways. It is particularly distressing when you know it is avoidable. Last year we actually reduced our fatality rate when based on the number of cars on the road and miles traveled. But we also set an all-time high in deaths. In order to end the carnage on our roads, we must:
G. Expand the services of the Commission on Alcohol Problems by a substantially increased appropriation. With alcohol involved in 60% of the fatal accidents, we shall never make significant improvements in highway safety without attacking the alcohol problem.
H. Require all drivers to submit to an alcohol test when involved in a fatal accident.
I. Raise penalties for driving while intoxicated.

J. Expand number and jurisdiction of State Highway Patrol. The presence of a marked car increases the blood pressure and good judgment of every driver.
K. Require annual motor vehicle inspection. L. Require physical examination upon renewal of a driver's license.
No nation, no state can call itself humane if it does not use the resources within its power to put an end to human misery. 

Nor can a people claim for themselves a measure of greatness if they cannot build cities which serve man, cities which facilitate his commerce, elevate his culture and house his family. Minnesota can build great cities.
Of all the large metropolitan areas in the country, our seven-county area is one of the finest.
Its environment one of the most free from pollution, Its people one of the most highly educated, Its culture one of the most diverse, Its civic leadership one of the most productive. With such a foundation, we have no reason not to develop the outstanding metropolitan area in the country. But there is much to be done much to be done this Session. The urgency is real. By the year 2000, the population of the seven-county area will more than double. What you decide this Session will have a profound effect on whether at the turn of the century our cities will be disintegrating or thriving. Last Session, you created a Metropolitan Council whose potential to bring order to the urban scene has drawn international attention. During this Session, we must make the Metropolitan Council a viable instrument for problem solving. I urge your thorough consideration of:
A. Granting the Metropolitan Council operating authority over sewage treatment facilities. This item has the highest priority.
B. Making the Transit Commission accountable to the Metropolitan Council.
C. Strengthening the Metropolitan Council's voice in highway planning. D. Placing in the Metropolitan Council powers to effectively plan for and oversee the disposal of solid waste. E. Giving the Metropolitan Council planning and operating authority over a metropolitan zoo. Our Twin City area should be completely major league in its educational and recreational possibilities. Furthermore, it is incumbent upon us to whom falls the burden of decisionmaking to lift our sights beyond tomorrow. As we have been taught by the prophets of old, "Where there is no vision, the people perish." Especially is that fate sealed if we take no steps to prevent 90% of our population from living on 1% of the land. Entirely new cities must be built. Minnesota is already a frontrunner in the new cities concept. There is generous support of the Experimental City project which has now been renamed "The Minnesota City." You will be asked to support this project during this Session. I ask you to give it your serious attention. 

Another problem of great concern to our people is jobs. "Of all the ways society serves the individual, few are more meaningful than to provide him with a decent job. ,,1 And a safe job. We score well in providing decent jobs. In fact, we anticipate that when official figures for 1968 are published, for the first time in over 25 years Minnesotans' personal income will meet or exceed the national average. However, we have been tragically weak in developing safe jobs. Despite our appalling number of disabling injuries from auto accidents, more people are disabled at work than on the road. I give my wholehearted support to improving occupational safety. We should:
A. Increase the number of safety inspectors and their appropriation for travel.
B. Stiffen the penalties for violations of safety regulations from a misdemeanor to a gross misdemeanor.
c. Provide a procedure for public participation in the formulation
of safety standards. But we need to do more than improve the safety in jobs. We need to
continue to generate additional job opportunities. Therefore, we must encourage economic development throughout the entire state.
Please consider five important suggestions which can help us expand economic opportunity:
D. Substantially increase our financial commitment to both industrial and tourism regional programs. The record setting economic growth of the State over the past two years is eloquent testimony to the potential of regional problem solving. In the last two years, there was a 22% increase in tourism.
The impact of our Rural Renaissance Program is already paying dividends in our communities. For example, comparing September, 1968, nonagricultural employment with September, 1966, communities around the State show significant increases: Thief River Falls - 39%, Marshall - 27%, Little Falls - 15%, Crookston - 13%, Owatonna - 11%, and WilLmar - 10%.
E. Adopt a uniform Monday holiday law, with significant personal,
as well as economic advantages. I F. Remove the present 5¢ per capita limit that a county can spend
for promotional purposes.
G. Remove the five-year spread and the One Hundred Million Dollar bonding program adopted last Session to allow us to accelerate the construction
of safer roads. Particularly is this desirable in view of the federal cutback of Sixty-two Million Dollars which has disrupted our highway planning.
H. Intensify our agricultural development. The fate of the State is
bound up on the fate of the farmer and the farmer is in trouble. During the past ten years the farmer's labor costs have risen
46%, his machinery costs 30%, his debt interest 59% and the parity ratio I dropped to 74%, the lowest rate since the depression.
Granted, States' powers in agricultural policy and price supports
are severely limited. But I am convinced there is a role states can play. I shall call in April a Governor's Farm Conference so farmers can help us search
out state-based agricultural efforts. The Governor's Conference on Rural I Community Development and the Governor's Conference on Tourism were the authors
of several proposals in this speech. I look forward to the brainstorming in
April. These eight proposals should greatly increase our ability to author decent
and safe jobs. 
Neither can we overlook a topic of special significance to me, to you, and to all Minnesotans. It is an issue which intimately affects every man and
directly tests our basic principles. It is the question of human rights.
Two years ago we recognized the vital importance of this concern and you
created the nation's first Department of Human Rights. You passed a fair
housing law. The Department formed almost 50 local human rights councils
and handled over 450 cases of discrimination. We worked to actively invite
minority families to Minnesota's vacation spots, I issued the first Executive
Order banning discrimination in State business, the Department of Employment
Security put local offices in Negro neighborhoods and on Indian reservations,
and 36,000 permanent and temporary summer jobs for youth were found in 1968.
Those are good strides but not good enough. I have already assigned a man to start recruiting summer job opportunities for youth for the summer of
1969.
A. Furthermore, I urge the creation and funding of a Governor's
Councilor Committee on Youth Opportunity within the Division of Social
Services, with a full time director to work with the President's Council on Youth Opportunity at the State level, to initiate and coordinate a truly
comprehensive annual summer program for disadvantaged Minnesota youth in such
areas as employment, education, cultural endeavors and recreation involving
all of State Government, and enlisting the aid of local government, industry I and private groups.
B. In addition, in my budget message I shall recommend expanding
the capabilities of the Department of Human Rights through significantly
increased appropriations.
This governmental effort, coupled with private actions and a personal I

- 19 -
resolve, can help maintain Minnesota's national leadership in securing individual equality.

Many proposals have been made in this speech. Many more shall come in

special messages and informal conferences. However, in order to bring focus

to the mass of legislation we will consider in the next five months, I want to

underscore 11 areas where I feel legislation is a must if we are to convince

people of the governmental institution's ability to respond to change.

1. Major crime legislation.

2. Major reorganization legislation.

3. Minnesota's Crystal Waters Program.

4. Financial relief for Senior Citizens.

There are few subjects on which I receive as much mail as on the

sincere complaints of Senior Citizens that they cannot afford to stay in their

own homes. In over 20 hearings conducted around the State by the Governor's

Council on Aging, this fact was emphasized. The special real estate tax relief

intended for Senior Citizens last Session was largely lost. We must, in this

Session, make it effectual.

5. Undergirding quality education.

6. Forceful highway and occupational safety legislation.

7. Expanded powers for the Metropolitan Council.

8. Creation of a drug education center and a narcotics enforcement

division.

9. Expanded community care for the mentally retarded and mentally

10. Expanded job opportunities.

- 20 -
11. A constitutional amendment to lower the voting age. The reasons to do so are well known and will be drawn to your attention by a bipartisan group of young people called the Minnesota Coalition for Lowering the Voting Age. I was pleased last week to have a visit with this exciting group of young people and I enthusiastically support their efforts. I know you will enjoy working with them.
It is time to quit preaching at the young to become interested while blocking them from becoming involved. Let us let them in.


This is a program that will enable us to step out boldly and creatively
in Phase II of the Decade of Decision. These are the years that will determine if states can solve problems, if people can once again believe in the institution of government.
And I want more than anything else to reaffirm the State's ability to solve problems and to rebuild our people's trust in that ability. I seek no higher honor than to be called simply a problem solver.
sincerely look forward to the next five months when we shall prove to the people that we can meet the problems we have inherited from the past. We can tackle the problems of the present and we will earnestly seek to anticipate and avoid the problems of the future.
might add, perhaps I would not be so sure of government's ability if I did not see the determination, judgment and imagination reflected in this Chamber. To those of you who come to your desk for the first time, Congratulations on having been chosen to represent many Minnesotans and best wishes in

this serious but stimulating responsibility.
To all of you, my door is open. I welcome your frequent visits, for our close cooperation will be most necessary.
would be remiss if I did not also say thank you to the people of Minnesota. I am sincerely grateful for the tremendous degree of citizen participation on many boards, councils, task forces, study groups and commissions. Of the hundreds of people I have asked to serve, rarely has anyone declined.
Thanks also should go to all the good people of our State who have contributed to making Minnesota second in the nation as the Quality of Life State. We are justly proud of that achievement.
In 1969, "The problems never looked tougher and the prospects never looked brighter and anyone who isn't stirred by both those statements is frankly too tired to be of much use to us in the days ahead."l
This is a time of opportunity, not despair. A time of challenge, not defeat. In the words of William Faulkner when he accepted the Nobel Peace Prize for Literature:
"I decline to accept the end of man. I believe that man will not merely endure, he will prevail. He is immortal not because he alone among the creatures has an inexhaustible voice, but because he has a soul, a spirit capable of compassion, of sacrifice and endurance."Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chief Justice, Associate Justices, Members of the 7lst Minnesota State Legislature, Fellow Constitutional Officers, Governors, distinguished guests and good friends.
As I have thought about your return to the Capitol and the beginning of this second session of the 7lst Minnesota Legislature, I have tried to sort out the significance of the work we begin.
When we have Russia perched on the border of Iran --
When we have worldwide apprehensions about a shaky economic future --
When night after night for 81 consecutive nights, we have heard the television report that begins "America held hostage."



In a world seemingly caught up in fear and hate and greed, what is the meaning of our actions over the next few months? Do they even matter? Do they have any lasting significance? Do they make any difference at all?

I would guess there are some lonely moments when each of you have asked yourself the same haunting questions and maybe there are times when the answers do not come clearly or don't come at all.

But upon some genuine soul searching, I have come to see that what we do in the days ahead is the very heart of all the international issues. In a very real sense, this is the battleground No, I am not talking about our partisan disputes-- the skirmishes between the House and Senate, Republican and Democrat, the legislative and executive -- these squabbles pale in the light of the larger concern. No, this is the battleground where we test, where we prove that a self-governing society is worth the sacrifice. Here is where we demonstrate that a free people have the discipline, the drive, the sense of purpose



to solve their problems. As I think about the importance of our work over the next few months, John Gardner's words keep coming back to me: "This free society begins with us. It must not end with us."

It will not, if we act responsibly, if we take control of our lives, if each of us realizes that we have tasks to perform, whether we be in government, business, education, civic organizations or within our families. The problems that confront this nation and this state do not fall exclusively on government or solely to the private sector. The issues on our agenda call on every person, every institution -- without exception.

Nowhere is that more apparent than in the energy issue. Just look at what Minnesotans are doing.

The Twin City Carpenters District Council, with the support of the Minnesota AFL-CIO, has volunteered to amend its rules on the apprentice-journeyman relationship so they can help the state's effort in weatherizing homes. with labor's help and CETA's workers, we can vastly increase the rate at which we weatherize our homes.



The Minnesota Business Partnership, an organization of the 50 largest companies in the state, representing over 10%. of our employees, is promoting ridesharing, vanpooling and other transit options as a means of getting employees to and from work conveniently at less cost to the worker and greater savings for all.

According to a sample of its members, the Minnesota Association of Commerce and Industry reports that nearly one~half of the firms have made extensive conservation efforts.

Public affairs organizations, such as the Citizens League, the Upper Midwest Council and the Urban Coalition all are contributing to the development of new ideas.

Local governments in Minnesota have taken some dramatic initiatives. That is clearly evident here in St. Paul. Moorhead has developed a comprehensive energy policy for municipal government operations.. New Ulm is planning a campaign to distribute conservation literature to every household in the city. Nine Iron Range communities and



the Arrowhead Economic Opportunity Agency are cooperating on a waste-elmwood program to debark elmwood and to distribute it for home heating fuel.

Hosts of individuals have silently done their part to conserve, as well.

This is the kind of spirit that lives in a free, creative, dynamic self-governing society. This is the kind of resilience Americans have. While there may be those on foreign shores who predict that the energy crisis will be our downfall, I predict it will be the issue that demonstrates to all the world the deep strength and true endurance of the American people.

We in state government also have a part to play. As I see it, the state has seven responsibilities in dealing with the energy issue.

First, it has to set an example. We cannot squander if we expect others to save.



Last spring, I asked state agencies to reduce over the next year the business miles driven by state employees by 10%. And we will meet that goal -- a reduction of four million miles. By buying smaller cars we improve our mileage anywhere from 11% to 28%.

You set aside $4 million for retrofitting state buildings. This session, I am asking for another $2.7 million. This $6.7 million investment will more than pay for itself in five years.

Second, the state should influence federal priorities. If the federal government attempts to heat southern swimming pools rather than northern homes, we must protest. If the federal government uses a system of energy aid which dispenses checks automatically, regardless of need for fuel assistance, we must protest. If these checks provide fuel assistance to those in prison, in nursing homes and on tropical islands, we must protest. If we have learned anything from the federal government's recent fiasco, it is that this state government



cannot afford either in terms of dollars or public confidence -- to enter into a statewide system of energy support which automatically dispenses money, regardless of energy needs and without an individualized and personalized review.

While Minnesota received approximately $79 million this year from the federal government, we may receive well over $100 million next year.

Consequently, my energy proposals are designed to take care of the unique needs of Minnesotans and at the same time capitalize on the infusion of expected federal dollars which should make a permanent state program unnecessary or at least greatly reduce it in scope.

In the upcoming months, as ~hese federal programs start to take shape, we will develop a state plan for the expenditure of those dollars, a plan which will be due in October or November 1980. This session we should realize that developing a coordinated energy program with federal and local government will be an evolving process.

Third, the state in cooperation with the federal government must help our needy citizens meet their energy costs.

Federal programs this winter will assist those with incomes up to 125% of poverty. Minnesota can and should do more. We should assist those with incomes between 125 and 150% of poverty -- and do so on a sliding scale.

I know some legislators believe we should extend the state's help to those with higher incomes. No matter where we draw the line, it will no doubt seem unfair to those just beyond it. We must be wise enough to strike the delicate balance between providing assistance to those who need it and recognizing the circumstances of those who not only have to pay their own costs but have to be taxed to assist others.

I propose that we continue the state crisis fuel program operating since October. This program gives the opportunity to obtain fuel to anyone who needs it but has no liquid assets to purchase fuel.



To meet the rising costs of fuel faced by-school districts, I am recommending an additional $12.4 million for transportation aid in 1980 and 1981. This item will be financed by the projected cancellations under the foundation- aid formula.

Fourth, the state must encourage everyone to undertake conservation efforts. One of the first places to start is in the home.

We've all heard the figure that approximately 30% of the heat in a home can be lost through the roof because of inadequate insulation. A 1979 survey indicated that 12% of Minnesota homes did not have any insulation at all and another 55% had less than 6 inches, or half the recommended level. Weatherizing these homes would result in significant energy savings.

I am proposing $11 million for additional weatherization grants. This proposal is in addition to the $45 million in loans for home improvements which will be available from February 1 to December 31. This program administered by the Housing Finance Agency is, I understand, the largest loan program in any state.

Besides our homes, another place we can encourage conservation is in our neighborhoods. Some of this is already beginning. In St. Paul, I know, there are neighborhoods where people are cooperating as a neighborhood organization to arrange for plowing of alleys, collecting of refuse.and repairing or insulating of homes. I believe that inventive people could also find new ways in neighborhoods to arrange for the delivery of other services that relate to energy conservation.

Certainly if there were a major crisis in oil supply, we would depend heavily on people to work out cooperative ways where they live to get each other to work, to the store and to church.

I hope that city councils and mayors will cooperate with these neighborhood efforts and encourage them.

The state itself can cooperate with cities in other ways.

I am requesting that the state participate with St. Paul and Northern States Power Company in a proposed district heating program. This could well serve as a model for other Minnesota communities. I have requested that you appropriate $2.7 million for our share of the initial' capital costs.

Furthermore, I believe that local government should be authorized to levy one-mill over levy limits specifically for energy conservation.

One of the most promising energy conservation measures the state can promote is ridesharing and vanpooling. We must encourage a more limited reliance on the single occupant car, especially for trips to and from work. For example, in the metropolitan area the MTC does a good job in feeding the central cities, but more than half of the jobs in the metro area are located in places that are not and could not realistically be provided for by bus system.



Because of the great potential for substantial energy savings in ridesharing and vanpooling, I am recommending $1.5 million which will provide us with a 15% tax credit for employer-sponsored vanpools, an expansion of the state fleet, an expansion of ridesharing and an increased enforcement of the 55 mi1e-per-hour speed limit. These actions could save Minnesota an estimated 52 million gallons of gas every year.

Fifth, the state government must seek to assure an uninterrupted supply of fuel. This is particularly critical for us because 60% of the crude oil used by the state's four refineries comes from Canada which is planning to phase out its crude oil exports to the United States. New crude pipelines are needed quickly -- one from the west and one from the south, and we will continue to push for them.

The sixth responsibility the state has is to encourage alternative energy sources. Minnesota has many possibilities to increase our use of renewable resources. I have asked for $1.3 million for this purpose next year.



This proposal provides for a gasohol demonstration program for farm-scale production operated by the University of Minnesota Department of Agricultural Engineering, a fuelwood management program, and a state alternative energy contingency account to provide state participation in wind resources, biomass-wetlands agriculture, and agricultural residue projects when non-state funds are committed for the demonstration projects.

The final obligation of the state is to inform the public about our choices. Government obviously cannot. do this alone and I want to note in particular the excellent work the media in Minnesota has done in helping the people understand the energy problem. A good job. The state must expand its efforts in public information, energy education and encouraging community support. I am requesting $1.3 million to be invested in this effort.

The energy program I have outlined includes assistance to our people, our schools and our cities. In addition, the state itself will require $9 million to cover its increased fuel costs. Together, these recommendations total $56.6 million.



During the past several months, I have traveled extensively and listened carefully to our people. I have attempted to prepare an energy package which has their support. As our energy ideas are discussed in these halls, I would anticipate much agreement. There may be different views as to how the state should integrate its efforts with the federal government, but we should not let our differences overshadow our common goals.

On the wall of the Senate Majority Leader's office hangs a sign with a Will Rogers' quote: "If we need wood, we chop down a tree. If we need oil, we dig a hole. If we want steam, we dig for coal. When we run out of these, we'll find out how good we are."

I think we are good to adapt and -- yes job done.

good enough to conserve, to innovate, good-enough to cooperate to get the

It is paradoxical that at the same time we ask people to reduce their travel and use less gas, the state is hurt by such action through its loss of revenue from the gas tax.



The costs of maintaining and constructing our roads have increased dramatically. The receipts to fund these programs have gone down. As a result, 61 highway projects totaling $122 million have already been deferred. If nothing is done this session, another $150 million in deferrals is possible. It is further projected that we will have a shortfall in revenues amounting to $300 million in 1982-83 and $450 million for 1984-85.

The choice is simple.

We can either invest now and protect the $16 billion we have put into our road system, or we can allow the deterioration of that network which will ultimately impair the economic future of Minnesota.

Over the past months, I have explored many options to fund our transportation network. I have sought to develop a balanced proposal to raise the necessary revenues. The highway funding package that I submit to you has four basic elements.

First, I propose a 4% sales tax on gasoline, the same percentage as our general sales tax. The tax would be on the pump price of gas less existing state and federal taxes.

The second part of my proposal is to cut the existing 9 cents per gallon state tax on gasoline to 7 cents. The combination of these two actions will make the overall tax more inflation sensitive.

Let me stop here a moment to try to clear up some confusion which has surrounded this proposal. Some have asked how is this recommendation consistent with my long standing commitment to indexing. I am extremely proud of the indexing we accomplished last session.



But indexing does not prevent the income tax you pay from rising with inflation, it simply prevents your tax payments from rising faster than inflation. Likewise, the revenues from Minnesota's 4% sales tax rise with inflation.

The third element of my proposal would authorize $150 million in general obligation bonds to be used over the next five years for the state's share of interstate highway funding. Interstate construction is funded 90% by the federal government. Minnesota's failure to raise the remaining 10% would result in our forfeiting the federal share.

The last element of my proposal is to shift the 4% excise tax on motor vehicle sales from the general fund to the highway fund. This transfer would begin on July 1 of 1981 and would begin with 25% of the excise tax being allocated to highways. In each of the succeeding three years an additional 25% would be transferred from the general fund, reaching 100% in 1984.



If we are to keep jobs in Minnesota, we must keep up our roads.

Environment We've talked about conserving energy in Minnesota, conserving and maintaining our roads -- but equally as important is conserving our natural resources.

Stewardship of our natural environment is a God-given responsibility. Again the responsibility falls on each one of us as you will see in the following initiatives:

I will call a State Environmental Conference this year to allow maximum public participation in a comprehensive review that I want undertaken. This review will focus on the state's role in environmental matters which is spread over some 85 programs.

-- I have prepared five bills for your consideration which will help focus the work of the Environmental Quality Board on the more significant issues and streamline the process of environmental reviews. There are too many delays and burdensome paperwork requirements now involved in the process.



I will support legislation to continue the work begun by the Water Planning Board when its legislative authority again terminates at the end of this fiscal year by incorporating those responsibilities under the Environmental Quality Board.

-- I have asked our state agencies to pursue with mining interests and the citizens most affected, how best to manage the development of our huge potential in copper and nickel and to address uranium exploration -- doing all of that while staying within sound environmental guidelines.

-- I have determined that an independent assessment of the safety of Minnesota's nuclear power plants should be undertaken. Thus, I have appointed a Nuclear Safety Committee. They have begun a comprehensive review of the safety of nuclear power plants and will, by April 1980, report to me their recommendations.



-- I will work in harmony with the Joint Legislative Committee on Solid and Hazardous Waste to discover answers to the safe disposal of an estimated 128,000 tons of hazardous waste per year. My preference is that those companies producing the waste should assume the primary responsibility for disposing it. If government action is necessary, the counties involved should next get into the act. Then, only if required, the State should enter the disposal siting picture and look first at the suitability of land already owned by the State. Throughout this process of locating and using disposal sites, regardless of sponsorship, the State will monitor the environmental impacts.

-- In the area of solid waste, I will support legislation that places the responsibility of planning and siting waste disposal areas at the county level. Equally important, the legislation must be tied closely to resource recovery programs.

Three weeks ago, I transmitted to the Legislature a Report on Environmental Quality. This report will allow everyone to see the wide range, complexity and urgency of dozens of environmental challenges facing Minnesota.



I will continue to work with you on the many environmental issues which we now know will be a constant public concern for as long as we inhabit this earth.

As I look at the priorities before us -- energy, transportation, environment -- I am optimistic that this can be a productive legislative session -- and hopefully a short one.

To that end, I have purposely limited my address today to major issues.

My concerns go beyond these limited number of issues. My legislative proposals, covering numerous topics from aid to the hearing impaired to agricultural promotion, are drafted in bill form, being readied for introduction.
You will also be receiving a statement on community development on February 7.



Today, you will receive the detailed description of my energy proposals for the 1980 session.

Budget You will also receive later today my supplemental budget recommendations. Let me simply summarize the budget highlights

The Department of Finance has projected a general fund balance of $84.7 million. $6.9 million will be used for salary increases due to the automatic cost of living increases. $4 million is dedicated to the capital budget. Proposed legislation accounts for $2.8 million and budget supplements amount to $10.1 million. My energy proposals will use $44.2 million from the projected balance plus $12.4 million of projected cancellations which I mentioned earlier for a total of $56. million for energy related assistance.

This will leave us $21 million as a protection against our income projections not being realized. For a $7.4 billion dollar biennial budget, that measure of protection represents only 3/10ths of 1%. It is prudent to maintain such a reserve for there are no attractive alternatives for cutting state spending in the final months of a fiscal year.
I believe the state can make substantial progress on these key issues within those budget constraints. Such progress would be a good record for any legislative session but this time, in this session, the people expect more from us. They care about this system of government and they want to see it work -- and if it can, they want to see it work better.

There are improvements needed in state government. Improvements that have the overwhelming support of the people of this state. And because of that, they cannot be ignored.
Therefore, I am proposing that the Legislature approve four constitutional amendments.



Since I have spoken out on these proposals extensively in the last month, I will not elaborate on them now'. I am conscious of the fact that one should not begin what is hoped to be a very short session with a very long speech.

First, I am proposing an amendment for initiative and referendum. Because I believe so strongly that citizens ought to be enabled to participate directly in the passage and repeal of laws, I made initiative and referendum the subject of my first campaign position paper in March of 1978. The proposal has been drafted in a manner which ensures that any petition would first have to have substantial support of citizens in all counties before it would come before the voters.

Second, I propose an amendment to require a 60% vote of
both houses of the Legislature to increase taxes. In the
past, taxes have been increased without adequate attention
having been given to their effects. An increase in taxation
should require a stronger consensus of the Legislature than
is now necessary as is the case with bonding decisions.



Third, I propose an amendment to limit increases in state spending. By limiting increases in state spending to the rate of growth in non-farm personal income, we can impose a discipline on state spending, and protect the people from the threat of government taking an ever larger share of their earnings. Over the past 10 years, state spending has increased 200% while non-farm personal income increased 106%. This amendment includes a provision that allows a two-thirds vote of both houses to override the spending limit in times of emergency.

There is a provision in this amendment which also requires that the state pay for programs it mandates for local government.

Fourth, I propose an amendment to create a bipartisan reapportionment committee. It is time that we remove reapportionment from the political arena. The people of Minnesota deserve a system which is free from partisanship. Our legislative and congressional district boundaries should be drawn to satisfy the best interests of the people, not for the advantage



of anyone political party. And I want to commend this Legislature for having passed this bill for a bipartisan commission in both houses in the last session.

In conclusion, we live in a world filled with strife and controversy. We have quite enough tension. Yet, there seems to be great expectation by some that the next few months of this legislative session may well add to what presently exists.

It need not be so. That which binds us is vastly more enduring than that which divides us.

Let us approach the issues before us with the sense of commitment that serious issues demand if they are to be resolved.



-- With the understanding that the public good must prevail over individual advantage  . .

-- With the courage to lead at a time when leadership may be painful   .

with the strength to persevere even when success may be uncertain . . .

with this kind of spirit we can do what must be done. And having done it, should that question come back before us, "Did our contributions have any lasting significance, any enduring value?" We will be able to say "Yes, yes we have made a difference."

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chief Justice, Associate Justices, Members of the 72nd State Legislature, Fellow Constitutional Officers, Governors, distinguished guests, friends and fellow Minnesotans,
Welcome back. I am looking forward to this legislative session-as I'm sure you are. We have many decisions to make. They will not be easy-they never are. But they will have a lasting impact on the future of this state.
This year the State of the State message cannot be given without looking at the state of the nation. We are gathering at a time of great uncertainty and unrest. Daily we watch the indicators . . . how deep is the recession? when will we start coming out of it? . . . how fast? We try to read the signs. We remain fundamentally hopeful--but realistically cautious, for we are still feeling the pain of a great economy struggling for new life.
We've seen prime interest rates soar to more than 20 percent, a major auto manufacturer 'facing bankruptcy, a sharp rise in unemployment, decline in average weekly earnings, a continued rise in the Consumer Price Index, and drastic declines in new housing.

The Middle East crisis again threatens our oil supplies.

Petroleum prices are increasing.

Energy rich states beckon industries from the energy poor states.

The recession has also hurt state and local governments.

Two years ago, state and local governments across the nation had an annual surplus of $4.2 billion. Now, just two years later, it is predicted their combined deficits will exceed $15 billion.

Minnesota has not been spared the effects of this recession.

Since we met, just nine months ago, many of our people have .been through difficult times--and it's not over yet.

I found it necessary, because of falling revenue receipts, to cut back state spending by $195 million for this fiscal year. If a majority of you in the Legislature can come up with a different way to handle the shortfall, I will be glad to work with you to find an amicable solution for the good of the people, since we still have six months until the end of the biennium.

This recession has meant our citizens have had to tighten their belts and live within their means. Is it any wonder that they expect the federal government, the state government and local government to do the same?
That is why the most important message that can come in this State of the State and the most important accomplishment of this legislative session would be this guarantee:
--No action by this Legislature which will increase the income or sales tax rates.
--No action which will cause property taxes to rise faster than the rate of inflation over the biennium.
Let me tell you why I so firmly believe that we must make this commitment to our people.
First, this recession has hurt. When people are working hard just to meet the house payments and pay the grocery bills, it is not the time to increase their taxes.
Keep in mind that if we compare the fall of 1979 with the fall of 1980, the actual number of jobs available was down 1.3 percent. Keep in mind that Minnesota is 19th among states in per capita income but eighth in the nation for its total tax burden, and 45th when comparing personal income remaining

after state and local taxes. We have the third highest personal income tax
(before indexing), and fourth highest corporate income tax.
Before 1979, before we indexed our state income tax, Minnesotans' income taxes went up more than a third faster than their income. Money came into the state coffers so fast that in the 1978-79 biennium Minnesota's state government spending grew by twice the rate of inflation. Such a practice had to stop or Minnesota state government spending would continue growing at an astronomical rate--we should bear in mind that in the last 14 years, state spending has doubled three times.
That is Why I made indexing the income tax one of the priorities of my campaign. That is why I continue to believe that adoption of indexing was one of the most important tax reforms in Minnesota's history. That is why I will resist any efforts to abandon indexing. This mechanism spreads the income tax brackets so that people whose incomes go up at the rate of inflation stay within the same brackets.
Now, when confronted with requests for new programs, we have to make the choice openly, Do we want to raise taxes and expand services? Or do we not raise taxes and basically let government spending grow at the rate of inflation?
We face that decision this session. It will not be an easy one.

There are still decisions to be made on the budget. I will announce
those in my budget message in three weeks.
In the meantime there are many optimistic signs for Minnesota's
future that should encourage us, We need a larger view of our state's
future than one which looks only at the next budget period.
Consider agriculture which accounts for about 45 percent of
Minnesota's gross state production. We have a tremendous future
demand throughout the world increases for food & fiber.
One of the areas of concern for agriculture is transportation.
If we produce food, and the world needs it, no ore will benefit if we
can't transport goods over highways, rail and water.
I have appointed a Task Force on Highways for Economic Vitality
to review transportation needs and funding. It has finished its work and
will soon send its report to me. Pm also waiting for a report from your Legislative Select Committee on Transportation, as soon as your task force has reported, I will call the two groups together to resolve any differences
and then make my recommendation to you.
Minnesota's future also holds bright prospects for dramatic growth
of our high technology industries.

Futurists predict that we are moving to an "information" society based on very sophisticated or "high" technology. As one informed observer recently said: The United States is rapidly shifting from a mass industrial society to an information society, and the final impact will be more profound than the 19th Century shift from an agricultural to an industrial society.
Minnesota1s computer industry will have a key role in the development of the information society. In several technologies--not just computers- Minnesota may also grow as a national and international leader.
Technology intensive industries provide the state with a broad and resilient economic base of high quality jobs for its citizens. Minnesota is generating small technology industries a rate two to three times the national average. These not only produce exciting jobs for Minnesotans but will assure America its position as the leader in technology production.
Throughout the United States we see five technological centers--Boston, the Washington-Baltimore corridor, the triangle area in North Carolina, Dallas and Houston, San Francisco. In the Midwest, there is no such center. With our industries, with the great research and teaching resources of the University of Minnesota Institute of Technology, we can become that center in the Midwest.
We have a tremendous opportunity for new jobs in high technology industries. And significantly, as we seek to meet our social responsibilities, we should remember that these companies have shown they can serve the central cities and reach minorities and the disadvantaged.

Minnesota's timber resources also give us great cause for optimism for the future.
More than 17 million acres in our state are wooded. That's fully a third of all the land in Minnesota. Almost 14 million acres are commercial forests, administered privately and by the state, federal or county governments.
Timber production and subsequent harvests can be substantially increased with improved timber management. According to the University of Minnesota School of Forestry, Minnesota forest production can be increased 25 to 40 percent.
I will be recommending significant steps to improve forest management. I want to commend the Legislature for the important steps taken by your Legislative Commission on Minnesota Resources. Because of your efforts we are ready for the next step in expanding the production, the harvest, the use, the jobs that will come with development of our timber resources.
As we take a broader look at Minnesota's future let us also remember that we are one of the most minerally rich states in the Union.
Minnesota has 25 percent of the nation's known copper resources and 12 percent of the world's known nickel reserves. Our mines produce 70 percent of the United States' taconite and iron ore. Minnesota has the only known cobalt deposit in the nation.

Even though Northeastern Minnesota has recently had economic difficulties because of a slowing in demand for steel, think what the problems would be without the research of Dr. E. W. Davis of the Mineral Resources Research Center,who developed the process for utilizing taconite. For a decade we have neglected mineral research; we must reverse that neglect and again support adequate minerals research.
Just as the creation of a taconite tax policy helped create that major Minnesota industry, we need tax policies for other minerals, particularly for mining of copper and nickel.
The development of our mineral resources can be of dramatic benefit to the people of our state, but we must extract and process those minerals in a manner which protects the high quality of our environment.
Maintaining the quality of life will also help to keep strong another key industry--tourism--which depends on the great natural beauty of our state.
In 1980, tourism contributed $2 billion to our economy, employed 120,000 Minnesotans and gave us $130 million in tax revenues. We should not forget the contributions of this industry. Our Department of Economic Development will maintain strong support for tourism.

I mentioned petroleum prices and supplies earlier, but there are some points of optimism about energy.
A crude oil pipeline from the south, adequate for our needs, is being constructed now and will be completed by this fall. If Canadian oil is cut off in the future we will have a means of bringing crude oil into Minnesota.
We have been successful in maintaining first priority for Canadian oil.
Money is coming in for development of alternative fuel.
We will be making headway in district heating.
Conservation efforts are paying off both in heating and in transportation: demand for gasoline is down? percent and demand for fuel oil has been reduced 12 percent.
Let me also note that as we continue to be concerned about the potential problem of industry leaving Minnesota for the energy rich Western states, we should not forget that the Western states are short of water. Minnesota is blessed with an abundant supply of good water. That should give us special incentive to make certain our water is conserved and kept clean.
Finally, we must never neglect our most valuable resources--our children-or forget the state's responsibility for their education.

As I have said before, one of the most difficult decisions I have had to make during my administration was to cut state aid to elementary and secondary schools when our revenues fell last summer.
The impact of that cutback was, however, cushioned substantially by the fact that most schools could draw on reserves that they had accumulated. When the $89 million cutback was announced, it was estimated that school districts had $285 million in reserves. These were, of course, accumulated in varying amounts by district. It should be kept in mind that the average amount of the recision equaled $97 per pupil unit. However, 83 percent of the school districts, with over 91 percent of the student&, had reserves in excess of $100 per pupil unit.
Frankly, the main concern I heard when I announced the cutback was not just the impact of the cut this year, but its potential impact in future years. Let me repeat my pledge: I will recommend that we restore the base to the level before the cutback in each year of the next biennium.
I will recommend that we increase the state's share of aid to education by the rate of inflation.
These recommendations will give education the largest dollar increase in the history of the state.
Furthermore, the actions of the last legislative session reduced the local effort in Fiscal Year 1982 from 26 percent of the cost of education to 19.3 percent. In other words, the local property taxes for operating schools raised $412 million in Fiscal Year 1981 and will be reduced to $331 million in Fiscal Year 1982. This means the state will pay 80 percent of the cost of education and local property taxes will fund 20 percent. This funding relationship goes well beyond the intent of the Minnesota Miracle to have the state share 70 percent of education costs. We must rev~ew this funding relationship in the context of a commitment not to increase the income or sales tax rates and not to have property taxes rise faster than the rate of inflation.
With this obligation there is not room to fund my proposal to improve education in the kindergarten through third grade. Explicit state funding for that concept will have to wait, but I will continue to urge:
--That parents and teachers become stronger partners in the child's learning process.
--That schools hold class size down in the early years to provide for more individual instruction.
--That we continue to seek environments free from disruptions which impair students' learning.

As we now begin this 72nd session of the Minnesota Legislature, we take up the task of shaping the future of our great state. Let us be mindful of our past. Let us remember our forefathers who worked to build this great state. They farmed the land, laid out the roads, built the ports, mined the ores, developed the technology. They have given us a great state, strong, diverse, able to provide good jobs for our people.
True, we are in troubled times but we know our parents and grandparents suffered hardships far greater than we have now. Their material goods were less; for most, the physical work was harder, their lives shortened by disease.
We must also remember that during those same years, men and women have come to these halls, setting aside personal gain to seek the public interest. They have given us an outstanding school system, an extensive park system, a broad transportation system, compassionate social services and a national reputation for good government.
The challenge before this legislative session is to respect the contributions over the past century made by millions of private citizens and thousands of public servants and to build on their heritage.
That is an awesome, never-ending task. One that calls forth the best in all of us. Do we have what it takes? Are we equal to it?

Can there be any other answer worthy of us but yes?
Yes, we can do it--
If we have faith in ourselves, faith in our fellow man, faith in our God.
Yes, we can do it if we aspire to work at it, aspire to fulfill our responsibility, aspire to achieve our ideals.
Yes, we can do it if we care--care for those who are different, those less fortunate; care for the impact our actions have on our own families and our children1s children.
Yes, we have what it takes if we ,care enough to work together to get it done.

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chief Justice, Associate Justices, Members of the 72nd State Legislature, Fellow Constitutional Officers, Governors, distinguished guests, friends and fellow Minnesotans:
We know that the national economy is struggling. And because of this, we know that Minnesota's economy is struggling.
But we also know that we will rebound from these difficulties and that we will be stronger for them. This is as certain as our people's strength and our land's abundance.
Just as certain is the fact that government will not be the same in the future as it's been in the past.
In part because of current economic problems; in part because of economic problems that may persist; but in largest part because of winds that awaken the nation, the role state government plays will be different.
It will be more trusting.
The roles local government, families, individuals and the private sector will play will be different too.

They will be larger.
These changes will be good for Minnesota and for our nation.
I want to talk this afternoon about these changing roles and my proposals and ideas for enhancing them in the next year, the next five years and the years beyond. These changes have been spurred, nationally and at home, by millions of votes and millions of voices.
Why do we face our current economic problems? Members of both parties don't agree on every point, but there is uniform agreement on the major cause: a national recession that is hurting 33 states in the same way it's hurting Minnesota.
But there are additional factors causing our projected budget shortfall.
Farm income is down significantly, reducing tax revenues, depressing farm communities and hurting farm families.
And state government has assumed too many obligations.
We must change the current arrangement so that local communities have a greater chance to run their own affairs, free of state intrusion.
We must look to the future realistically and responsibly.

We must change our policies so that we avoid, as much as possible, again having to make the terribly painful and disruptive choices that we must make now.
But more than a change in policy, we need a change in attitude.
Americans have come to realize, in a relatively short period, the real limits on our energy resources and the need to conserve them. In the same way that wasting energy was second nature to many of us a few years ago, saving energy is now instinctive.
We must develop the same responsible attitude toward government and its capacity. Only in this way can we plan wisely,
The times demand that we do better in providing public services. The men and women who carry out these services do a commendable, often excellent job, And our public institutions are not without cause for praise. We must not fall into the trap of criticizing, never nurturing them,
But the fact remains that government has grown too big and too expensive and we must look for new ways of serving the public; new ways that meet our responsibilities as a caring people; but ways that halt the prohibitive rise in the cost of government.
We can find new ways.

The proposals I will make to the 1982 Legislature are in six major areas:
(1) Because jobs mean individual dignity and economic health, I will propose steps to improve the capacity of Minnesota's private sector to create good jobs;
(2) because we must increase equity and local responsibility in education, I will propose improvements in the way in which we fund our schools;
(3) because we must strengthen the relationship people have with local. government, I will propose reforms in the financial relationship between the state and local units of government;
(4) because we must show greater trust in the wisdom and compassion of local officials, I will propose elimination of stifling state mandates and regulations;
(5) because we must find less disruptive ways of settling our public labor-management disputes, I will propose changes in the Public Employees Labor Relations Act (PELRA) so that the public is better protected; and
(6) because drinking drivers are killing innocent people, as well as themselves, I will propose a stronger program to end this utterly senseless carnage by getting them off the road.


Let me describe these initiatives in greater detail.

First, I will propose legislation that will mean more jobs for Minnesotans.

Jobs, jobs, jobs. They are what we must have or else everything falls apart: Individual lives are pained, families break apart and the economy collapses. I'm determined that we do all we can to assure a good future for Minnesota's working men and women.

I propose that we lift the burden that we have heaped on the private sector so that we free the creativity and industry of our people. My program for improving our job climate includes the following points:

--We must bring our workers' compensation system into competitive posture

with those of our neighboring states. This can only be done through substantial

change in the benefit provisions of Minnesota's workers' compensation law. The

report, presented to the Legislature yesterday by Insurance Commissioner

Michael Markman recommends this change as the only way to bring our system into

line with those of neighboring states. We must control costs for employers while

fully maintaining a workers' compensation system that provides adequate benefits

paid promptly and equitably to men and women injured on the job.

--We must improve our unemployment compensation system so that it doesn't run a deficit--as it now does and so that it doesn't have to borrow from the federal government--as it has done for years. Our current system is forced to do this despite the fact that our unemployment rate is significantly lower than the national average. My proposal will lead to a solvent trust fund a more equitable distribution of costs based on the direct experience of employers and assurance that workers who lose their jobs are treated fairly. The proposal will also encourage unemployed workers to obtain suitable employment as soon as possible.
Several points in my job climate proposal call for eliminating obstacles to job growth found in Minnesota's tax system. Changes would take effect in the next biennium.
--We must recognize the importance of small business in the creation of new jobs. Toward this end I recommend that we reduce the corporate tax rate to 6 percent on the first $100,000 of income,
--We must reduce commercial-industrial property taxes. I will recommend that the first $50,000 of commercial-industrial market value be assessed at a reduced rate of 30 percent. Twenty-five percent of commercial-industrial property in the metropolitan area and about 40 percent of such property in nonmetropolitan areas of Minnesota have market values below $50,000.

--And we must bring three additional taxes into conformity with federal schedules: Capital gains taxes, estate taxes, and depreciation rates.
I will also recommend two initiatives that recognize the important role played by high technology in Minnesota's future, and the increasingly important role that must be played by the private sector in helping meet community and' human needs.
--I will propose a challenge grant program that will meet, dollar for dollar, private contributions to three research centers at the University of Minnesota's Institute of Technology. These are the Microelectronics Center, the Productivity Center and the Biotechnology Center.
--I will further propose a corporate social responsibility tax credit. This credit will encourage businesses to help neighborhood and other nonprofit organizations.
This total program will help keep Minnesota competitive with other states as it will get rid of serious obstacles to job growth. Let me make this last point clear: The goal behind this program is not just to get businesses to relocate in Minnesota. Research shows this kind of approach doesn't work well. Rather, the goal is to make certain that we don't have unnecessary disincentives to businesses starting here, coming here, growing here and staying here,

To fund this job climate program I will recommend that the 1 percent increase in the sales tax, that was passed last spring, be continued beyond its scheduled 1983 termination,
For my second initiative, I will propose legislation to significantly reform the basic funding formula for Minnesota school districts in order to assure greater equity and local discretion.
Our current system of school finance is not working well. It does not achieve the equity in educational opportunity that was hoped for when the program was put in place in 1971. Moreover, the current system limits local discretion too much.
I assure you that greater local discretion and improved equity are compatible goals.
In place of the grandfather revenue, declining enrollment revenue and the discretionary revenue programs, I will recommend legislation that will authorize local boards to obtain up to $400 per pupil unit in additional equalized revenue. This will be above the basic equalized foundation allowance. Besides this, school boards would be able to levy above this total if they chose.

The decision about what level of revenue to seek would be that of school boards--not the state.
I will propose that this new program be phased in over three years, starting with the 1983-84 school year.
I also will propose a program to eliminate as many mandates and regulations as possible. This will apply not only to schools, but to other programs as well.
Third, I will propose a series of changes that will improve the relationship between local governments and the state, as well as the relationship between local governments and the people they represent.
These changes recognize that state aid to localities must reflect actual, rather than projected, state revenue. Therefore, I will propose that all state aids dispensed to local governments and schools be paid out in a shared, prorated manner based on actual state revenues. That is, if state revenues are unexpectedly low, local and school aids will fall by that same margin, up to 5 percent of the appropriation. On the other hand, if state revenues are unexpectedly high, local and school aids will increase by the same margin, again by up to 5 percent.

My proposals recognize that our current property tax system is too confusing. Therefore, I will recommend that the homestead credit system be ended and that, instead, homestead property taxes be held down by lowering the portion of market value which is taxable. Taxes would be no higher in this new system than in the current system.
Agricultural property taxes would be held down in the same way by reducing the portion of market value which is taxable. This would make up for the elimination of the homestead credit and the agricultural mill rate credit.
My proposals also recognize that local residents need to understand the real costs of local services and that a useful tension should exist between taxpayers and local officials. Therefore, I will recommend that levy limits for cities, towns and counties, that are scheduled to be lifted in 1983, not be reinstated. Local communities and schools will be better able to decide for themselves how they should conduct their affairs.
Fourth, I will recommend a program to eliminate, now and in the future, unnecessary state mandates and regulations. vJe must free the hands of local officials to the greatest extent possible.
These changes will be made by statute and by departmental action.

To get off to a good start, I will recommend the immediate elimination or amendment of 16 state mandates.
I will recommend the creation of a permanent procedure for cataloging, analyzing and evaluating existing state mandates. The goal will be to remove and amend as many mandates as poss i b1e.
I will recommend that the Office of Local Government in the Department of Energy, Planning and Development be responsible for this job. I have chosen the Office of Local Government, rather than a new task force or commission, so as. to avoid the very duplication and red tape that we must excise.
And I will recommend that all proposed legislation affecting local governments, from this point on, clearly identify potential costs for communities.
Fifth, I will propose changes in PELRA that take into account our experience over the past year. PELRA, as amended in 1980, has produced over 50 strikes.
I will propose amendments in PELRA that will lead to more voluntary settlements and fewer strikes. This will be accomplished by strengthening the role of mediators in the collective bargaining process.

In addition, automatic time frames for strike legalization will be eliminated. This will encourage a greater degree of good.,.faith bargaining and will be fair to all concerned.
And I will propose that certain state hospital workers be given essential status similar to that covering local hospital workers.. This will ensure that mentally ill and other residents of our state institutions receive basic care without interruption,
Sixth, and last, I want to talk about saving lives. I will recommend specific, unflinching steps to get drinking drivers off the road, We must further 1ead the way in ending the nati on I,S amazing indifference to highway death and injury.
Almost seven out of 10 drivers killed in traffic accidents in Minnesota had been drinking beforehand.
I will propose legislation that will enable law enforcement officers to increase their arrests for drinking drivers and to insure that repeat offenders are dealt with more severely and more effectively,

Minnesota already has one of the best driving while intoxicated control systems in the country, and I thank the thousands of law enforcement officials who make it so, but we must do better.
Drivers must know that tough enforcement will become even tougher and that certain and immediate consequences will follow all drinking and driving offenses.
I will propose legislation that will broaden the authority of law enforcement officers to give alcohol tests to traffic violators. Any driver with an alcohol concentration of more than .05 will be considered impaired; and repeat drunken drivers who test .10 or higher will be charged with a gross misdemeanor. Strict enforcement and heavier penalties will be the rule, though we will not back off on our commitment to rehabilitation.
We must convince people that they have the deepest personal responsibility not to drive if they drink.
These, then are the proposals I will be presenting for your consideration this session. They're in keeping with principles of frugality and individual and local responsibility.
But let's look further into the future, beyond the constraints of this legislative session.

We must seek a society in which there are good jobs for everyone who is able to work.
We must seek a society in which communities are warm and neighbors are compassionate.
And we must seek a society in which families are strong, for their loving arms are the arms that hold the nation together.
These, of course, represent noble thoughts more than they do a plan for the future. All good things cannot be, and should not be, in the hands of governmental officials.
What we must expect from public officials is leadership in charting government's course.
The long-term changes I envision in public services are so fundamental that they can only take root outside of government.
As things now stand, government not only funds great numbers of programs, it also manages them. Why? How can we expect government to provide effective and efficient service if there are few alternatives?

Shouldn't people have a greater opportunity to shop around for the services they now receive?
Shouldn't the private sector be given greater opportunity to offer these services at a competitive price?
And shouldn't public officials have substantially more flexibility than they now have in carrying out welfare, sanitation, law enforcement and any number of other public services?
My answer to all these questions is absolutely yes.
For these things to happen, government must become less parochial, less self-protective, and less fearful of competing on the open market. But government cannot accomplish these changes alone, or even lead the way.
Leadership must come from the private sector. I stand ready to offer as much help and encouragement as I can in enabling creative people in the private sector to playa larger role in carrying out needed services that have been monopolized by government.
I also call upon individuals and groups to rethink, in the most fundamental way, the way in which we provide public services. We must make certain that good public services are not dependent on ever-increasing taxes.

Suggestions have been made recently in newspapers and elsewhere that such studies be made. I agree. I have asked Kent Eklund, Commissioner of Energy, Planning and Development, to convene a diverse group, from both in and out of government, to take a sharp look a,t Minnesota's future.
Ladies and gentlemen, these are difficult days.
They are difficult for political leaders who must make decisions that please no one.
They are difficult for employees, both public and private, who are afraid for their jobs.
And they are difficult days for those who foot the bill for government.
As we go about our work this session we must balance two, at times conflicting, goals.
We must provide exemplary public service for the people of Minnesota.
But at the same time, we must remember that these very same people--our neighbors and others who have chosen us to represent them--are in a financial corner, just as our state is.
I urge us to be responsive to their Wishes. Thank you.

Mr. speaker, Mr. President, Mr. Chief Justice, members of the Court, Constitutional Officers, members of the Legislature and my fellow Minnesotans:
Opening statement: War in the Middle East; deaths of Karl Rolvaag and Gus Donhowe

Richly blessed with rivers, lakes, streams, major cultural center - agriculture and agribusiness.
Spawned 3M - gave birth to large scale computers at Control Data and Cray Research.
Our University became a major research center guiding the way to everything from taconite to human transplants.
Our people have won awards ranging from Nobel Prizes to Pulitizers to National Athletic Championships.

We are a healthy, productive people with our roots and

traditions deep in Minnesota soil.
Our pioneering stock is still with us, we are adventurers , bright, brawny and optimistic.


Now that quality of life is threatened. It is not just the recession or war, but rather driven by our sense of anxiety. We are uncertain about our future.
a. Real income has declined for the past three years. People are working hard and actually earning less. They see us slipping in everything from school test scores to political ethics to down grading of living standards.
b. Jobs have peen slowly disappearing along North Dakota and South Dakota- and now along Iowa. Wisconsin has now become a real job threat as they have emerged as a lower cost state.
c. Competition for jobs is a real fear. But the real anxiety goes beyond that point. Our values of prudence have peen assaulted. Assaulted by a culture that has focused on short-term greed. The "What's in it for me" philosophy has prevailed.
The 80's may we be remembered as the decade of greed. It permeated all institutions and all sectors of life 

Now one day after we honor Dr. Martin Luther King, we have an opportunity to put all that aside and do what King's life stood for an appeal to the best that lies within us all. We must challenge the past or become a prisoner of it. I say that people want a "new beginning" with a focus on excellence, truth and a summons to duty.

You and I sought the opportunity to serve. We told the people that we had the power and courage to change things Ñ now. Let us live up to that promise of change.
All too often, government holds itself out as an agent of change, but that is not always true. The fact is we tend to dislike change because it compels us to get out of our comfortable rut. The status quo is comfortable.
Politically we created a system where some 400 units of government come to st. Paul and plead for more money. There is very little discussion about goals or objectives or performance - primarily just the need for more money to continue the past.

a. For six years during the 80's we ranked third in total government spending growth 

b. Spending grew 35 percent higher, than personal income; 42 percent higher than the gross state product; 57 percent higher than inflation.

c. During this timeframe, had we spent at the rate of inflation, we would now have $9 billion.

Neal Peirce last week changed his tune about Minnesota. No longer were we the state that worked or the Dynamo of Reform, but another one that co~sted down "fiscal Easy street" during the 1980's.
We avoided the tough decisions.

We followed the lead of the federal government by spending money

that we did not have and pretending to the people that all was well.

"Trust us" was our motto. We, on the state level, authorized over

$900 million of new debt, a 22 percent increase since 1988.

Cities, townships and counties increased their debt 54 percent

since 1983 -- from $2.8 billion to a whopping $4.3 billion.

We favored soccer stadiums over child nutrition, community

centers and swimming pools over classrooms while we transferred record

levels of debt to our children. On the operating side of the budget,

we favored spending over discipline.


Since July of 1989, we on the state level have been spending

$800,000 per day more than we have been taking in. That comes to over

$24 million a month. And when leaders like Gene Merriam and Duane

Benson said "fix it," we ignored them and pretended all was well.

So we have a past that is rich with blessings and some

short-sighted behavior that embarrasses us. I say, challenge the

past. Let us go forth and see the challenges ahead as opportunities
and not as pits of hopelessness and anguish.

Let us do what we told our people we would do -- lead with

intelligence and courage.

Our first challenge is the current budget. We are now spending,

as I indicated, $800,000 per day more than we have taken in. If we

chose to ignore this hemorrhaging, we will have spent $600 million

more over the past two years than we took in.

In order to better plan our financial future, t asked a

bipartisan panel of financial experts to evaluate our current

financial situation and make some recommendations.

This Blue Ribbon Panel consisted of former finance commissioners
who served both Democrat and Republican Governors and experts from the
private sector. Their recommendation was unanimous - cut $197 million
from the current bUdget right now and then reduce anticipated spending
by $1.8 billion in the budget for the next two year period. I think
this is good advice.
It is tempting to go into the state's $550 million emergency
reserve fund. but that would be like dipping into a savings account in order to pay for a life style we cannot afford. It would simply be
another postponement of the problem. But let me also share with you certain facts:

1. We have this problem largely because we spent more than we earned. Raising taxes or depleting our savings is not the
answer.
2. The recession is saucer-shaped and recovery will be slow.

3. Any tampering with the reserve fund will attract the attention of the bond rating agencies and possibly place our bond ratings and those of local governments in jeopardy.

4. We have an additional $1.8 billion problem that we will deal with in February but suffice it to say, prudence says "protect the reserves." 

No, the only choice is to reduce our current expenditures.


Now I know that there will be cries of protest. We have built a system of government where spending is favored over prudent behavior. But, let us look at the facts:

1. Every state that surrounds us is more tax and job competitive.

2. The Great Lakes Governors met last week and not one indicated
a willingness to increase taxes. They all know the value of
jobs.

3. As Joanell and I traveled through Minnesota this summer and

fall, the message was clear - reduce government spending and

reduce taxes. The people are tightening their belts and they

want us to do the same.

Let us do it willingly and without complaint.

I am pleased with the speed with which the Legislature is processing the reduction bill. It shows that we can and will work together, always putting the long-term interests of people first.

Now let me briefly touch on another matter of great urgency workers compensation reform. Three times this Legislature courageously passed a reform measure and three times it was not signed into law. Rest assured that I will work with you to achieve passage.

Let us send out a bipartisan signal to all those who create
jobs. We want our costs of doing business in Minnesota to be competitive with other progressive states because we want jobs and we want more jobs for our people.
If we can just discipline our spending and make job creation costs competitive with other states, believe me, this will be a most successful legislative session.

But I think we can do more.

I. First of all, we can stop micro-managing our entire

governmental system. Federal - state - Local. It is too costly and

gets in the way of solution and lacks political integrity.

Local Government - day care -- education - environment

Our budgets are line-item. We must continue process toward performance based budgeting. Representative Simoneau and Senator erriam have led the way in these reforms. I commend the Legislature. Let us focus on outcome and value of our services.

Focus on Education - We may be short on dollars but not on reforms:

1. We will not run local schools from st. Paul. Site-based management will be our goal.
Local Government - Maximize flexibility and creativity. We are hamstringing our teachers. Let teachers do what they do best - teach

2. A new contract - children - parents - teachers - community state - accountability and results.
3. Train children for jobs that exist - build an understanding between schools and business so that a natural relationship occurs always with a focus on excellence. Our children must know that there is a linkage between high grades and good jobs.
4. Seventy-four percent of our teenagers are in the labor force. This is the highest in the United States. This is both good news/bad news situation.

a. Work ethic is strong,"
b. Students who work are often tired - they are lulled into false sense of security. They must know the value of a high school diploma. The primary role of the student is to
study and work hard. Jobs are secondary.

III. Long term property tax reform: 1. commercial-industrial property tax rates are the highest outside of New York City.

2. We must work toward eliminating the third tier of property taxes for homeowners. More progressive than the income tax and very punitive.

IV. New Partnerships

Now we have a host of concerns that compel government to think
differently. Over the past twenty years, government has been the

provider of first choice and not the provider of last resort.

Somehow we have decided that we have the capacity to solve all

problems. We have encouraged people to seek a government remedy

without first exploring other options. The result is we have gotten

ourselves into activities well. beyond government's role and ability.

We have subsidized homes for the ver,y wealthy, thrown enormous

subsidies at out of state businesses in the hopes of luring them into
Minnesota, and just recently disclosed a tax subsidy to a nightclub

promoting nude dancing.

Government must define itself and its mission. We must agree

that the states who know where they are going are the ones most likely

to take the right direction. After all, as w learned from Alice in
Wonderland, if you do not know where you are going, any road will get
you there. We know where we are going.

We are going to make Minnesota more job competitive with other states. Four years from now I hope we will read stories in Wisconsin

newspapers about how Minnesota is attracting jobs instead of vice

versa.

That means we have to hone in on government costs, put logic and

fairness in our regulatory system, and focus on our vision for the

future by protecting and enhancing our assets and overcoming our

liabilities. The first step will be the creation of a private-public
partnership that will help define:

a. Government relations so we can define the function of
government, where that function ought to be located, the value
of that function. In other words, specifically define goals and
objectives and accountability,

b. Review governmental costs and work with management on instituting the efficiencies necessary to provide the tax payer with a real quality service at an affordable price.
It is our intent in that this partnership, which we will call
the Committee on Reform and Governmental Efficiency -- CORAGE -- will work closely with the Dyrstad commission of local government so that all have input into the process. Rest assured, Minnesotans want cost-efficient government.

..Our concept of new partnerships ,

also extends to the one between

the Governor and Lt. Governor. I said at the outset that Joanell

Dyrstad will be a spokesperson for this administration and I meant it.

Minnesota has always been known as a state filled with people of

vision and creativity. If there ever was a moment in our state

history when a sense of vision was absolutely essential, it is now.

Our state has, as I have outlined, a serious short-term bUdget

problem, and we will deal with that. But over the next four years, we

will be looking beyond the present and into the future of this state.
We must become geared up to meet the long-range challenges of
interstate and global competition. We need to reestablish goals and

form long term objectives to reach those goals. We can begin by

forging new partnerships and creating new structures that will take

Minnesota into the 21st century.

We know we must change the way state and local governments

operate. The relationship between the federal government and state
and local governments has changed. Federal revenue sharing no longer
exists. Federal support to pay for major new, as well as ongoing
social initiatives, is no longer a reality. We recognize that and we

have and will adapt to it.

In 1932, Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis coined the phrase "laboratories of democracy." He was talking about state governments and the idea, as he put it, that "a single courageous state may, if its citizens choose, serve as a laboratory; and try novel social and economic experiments without risk to the rest of the county." 

A laboratory of democracy is what Minnesota must become over the next four years if we are to make the fundamental changes that are vital to the social welfare and economic health of our state.
One experiment we will be focusing on is the forming of new partnerships and an examination of existing ones. state support of local government activity is being reduced. It is a challenge local government can rise to if they are given the flexibility to do so. Local government has adapted well before and will do so again. The removal of unnecessary mandates and the improvement in tha working relationship between state agencies and local governments will be a big step in improving communication and strengthening that relationship.
Municipalities have positioned themselves well with $183 million in reserves; counties have $245 million in reserve. They are well aware of the impact of taxes on the creation of new jobs. Many Minnesota firms have moved across the border to Wisconsin and more are posturing themselves to do so because of taxes; and, Governor Thompson has pledged "no new taxes."
We need to realistically face that competition. To do that, then, we must design new management techniques, restructure bureaucracies, empower our employees and instill a new dedication to making state government and local government consumer-oriented and user-friendly.


It is our responsibility to listen to the taxpayers, not the tax-spenders. Our consumers will tell us what they need and are willing to pay for. As I have said, we are challenging the past. 
We need to create new partnerships with the people of our state

as well. We need to bring down the barriers to participation in the

economy, whether they be poverty, racial and/or sexual discrimination,

illiteracy, access to child care or government regulation.

We need to start early and focus on prevention. This means

supporting programs that reduce unwanted pregnancies, provide access

to pre-natal care, and teach parents how to do a good job of raising

their children.

We will be focusing on day care. We are not going to be using building codes to keep churches and synagogues out of the day care
business any more. If government cannot solve the problem, the least

we can do is to help those who can.

And our administration would rather spend $2,600 to enroll a

child in Head Start for a year than pay $30,000 a year down the line

to house that person in a state prison.

We need to forge new partnerships between education and social
service organizations. Many of our children just are not ready to
learn when they come to school.

Some are not ready because they live in homes where domestic

violence so scars them that they lose the capacity to relate to other

people.

We have good laws to protect battered families, but we need to

improve enforcement. A "cooling off" period may help when someone in the family has been arrested for domestic abuse or for violation of an order for protection.


Had such a policy been in place for Kathryn Hebert (A-BER), we
perhaps would not have had to face the horror of finding her body in a
shallow grave, and her children would still have a mother.

Children who are not ready to learn, for whatever reason, will

not learn, no matter how talented and dedicated are their teachers.

Schools need to be able to concentrate their efforts on teaching

children. The entire community, each and every one of us, must assume

responsibility for each and every child in our state.

Luckily, we will not have to do it all ourselves. This is one
of the great things about the people of Minnesota: People want to help. They want to pitch in. They want the barriers removed.

We are fortunate to live in a state where volunteering is an

integral part of our culture and heritage. Fifty-eight percent of

Minnesota adults give an average of four hours each week to help

others. The Minnesota Office of Volunteer Services calculates that

Minnesotans contribute about $4.2 billion dollars worth of services

every year.

Minnesotans are extremely creative in developing working

volunteer partnerships. Churches, businesses, schools and clubs are

reaching out. We are asking you to join us by saying -- "yes, I can

do that"

I can pitch garbage in a can so someone else does not have to pick it up. I can recycle to save the environment. I can volunteer to help paint someone's house, or deliver a meal, or assist in my child's school. I can lend that helping hand.

You and I must become participants in our society, relying less on government to solve every problem and more on ourselves.


By involving our people and our communities and our institutions

in new partnerships, we can create a new model for state government --

one that can provide leadership and vision not only here in Minnesota,

but elsewhere in the country.

We will also create new partnerships with business. We need to

create an entrepreneurial climate in this state, where public and

private sector leaders -- aided, not hindered, by state government

can come together and pursue new ventures, start new companies, and

create new jobs for Minnesotans.


We are excited about forming partnerships with young businesses

which will grow and expand and become our Fortune 500 companies of

tomorrow.

Minnesota is well known for the ones we have now -- 3M,

Northwest Airlines, General Mills, and so many others -- and we must

keep them strong. But the state's future is being creative right now

with new start-ups -- companies that export products and import jobs.

I have asked some of these people to join us, to give you

examples of this spirit. There are many more. These are people who

have taken small companies and expanded them through personal

initiative and commitment to Minnesota.

Glen Taylor, head of Taylor Corporation of North Mankato, which now employs 3,000 people in the Mankato area; and
Greg Herrick, head of Zeos International of New Brighton, a manufacturer of personal computers; T. Michael Clarke, CEO of KATUN Corporation of Bloomington, a leading supplier of copier and printer parts;
Ron Eibensteiner, president of Mirror Technologies of Roseville,
a manufacturer of peripheral equipment for computers;
Kay Fredericks, president of Trend Enterprises, which designs
and manufactures educational products.

Will you people stand up and be recognized. These people

represent the future of our state, and there are many more like them.

What will it take for businesses like these to succeed, and for

more just like them to grow?

Before we do anything, we must get the fiscal crisis behind us, by reforming workers comp and the commercial-industrial property tax system.

Beyond that, we need to create a competitive environment, an

environment that is at least competitive with states with whom we

share a border.

Last fall the people of Minnesota chose us to be their agents of

change. We intend to fulfill that legacy. Now I would like to touch

on a few of our priorities.


within state government, we intend,to create a climate where

there is equal opportunity for all Minnesotans. We have asked Linda

Barton, Commissioner of Employee Relations, to begin immediately to

develop a training program for all state employees to increase

awareness and sensitivity to human rights issues. Let no one think

for one moment that enduring sexual harassment falls within the scope

of their employment. It does not.

When it comes to the environment, we need to start with the

notion that we are stewards of our land. Our children deserve to inherit a state which reflects care and respect for the environment.


Our priority this session will be to work for passage of the no-net-loss wetlands bill. This is not a new proposal, but it is one
that has never reached the Governor's desk to be signed into law.

We stand herb tonight to tell you that we support the

no-net-loss wetlands bill and ask you to work together on a

bi-partisan basis to pass it.

Representative Willard Munger, you are the dean of this body and

we are asking you to join hands with Marcus Marsh and get this bill to

my desk as soon as possible.

Also, I want to hold those who pollute our environment
accountable for the cleanup. There is also a fairness issue here.

Environmental violations must be dealt with fairly and with uniform

penalties against all violators, and we will work toward that end.

In the next four years, we believe there is much to be gained

from reorganizing both the Pollution Control Agency and the Department

of Natural Resources. We would like to see more resources directed to

field work throughout the state and less to "paper shufflers" here in

St. Paul.

The 1990 Legislature passed a landmark law called the toxic

pollution prevention act. It was designed to encourage businesses and

individuals to reduce the amount of dangerous chemicals released into

the air, water and ground.

Representative Munger, I pledge that our administration will

vigorously enforce your law. Whenever we deal with natural resources, we must remember that we do not inherit these resources from our parents but rather we borrow them from our children. Our children are well ahead of us on

this issue.

We intend to forge new partnerships in protecting out

environment. In doing so, we must strike a delicate balance and see:

mutual harmony among the tourism industry, sportsmen- and -women,

business, and those who wish to preserve the serenity of a clear river

or a majestic forest.

Another priority of ours is affordable health care for every

Minnesotan. We recognize that this is an ambitious undertaking, and

we will not be able to turn our full attention to it until our bUdget

crisis is solved. But we will be proposing a pilot project in the budget we submit

for the next two years that will begin to address this important

matter.

However, we in government are not 100 percent of the answer to

this problem either. If everyone in Minnesota would make the

commitment to stop smoking, to exercise regularly and to eat more

healthy foods we could make enormous reductions in the cost of health

care.

We as individuals must begin to recognize that we have an

obligation.

Once the budget situation is under control, we would also like

to find a way to make higher education affordable to our citizens in

an era of spiralling college costs. Higher education should not be

out of the reach of so many people, and the Edvest program I proposed

earlier is one way to make college more affordable.
For two marvelous weeks in January, the eye of the world focused on Minnesota. They saw our Metrodome, our ice palace, and felt the warmth and glow of our people.
We showed the world the special "can do" attitude of Minnesotans. Who else would celebrate winter by engaging in outdoor competitions of every kind, castle building, sculpture making, softball on ice, cross-country skiing, skating and snowmobiling.
That "can do" attitude was not born in 1992. It was forged in our earliest days when the first pioneers began to settle here. They built farms, mined ore, logged and fished. Minnesota was the rugged frontier that attracted those who understood the risk in opportunity and the hard work in success.
In 1847 a 30 year-old teacher and missionary named Harriet Bishop traveled alone from Vermont to create the first public school in St Paul. She traveled by lake, land and river through the wilderness, and made the last leg of the trip up the Mississippi by canoe with two Dakota Indian women.
At that time, St. Paul was no more than a cluster of log huts along the Mississippi. Harriet Bishop's first school house was a former blacksmith shop in downtown Saint Paul. Rats and snakes plagued her mud plastered log schoolhouse and she had only a few school books.
She also started Minnesota's first Sunday school class. By the third Sunday she had attracted 25 children with such diverse backgrounds that an interpreter was needed who spoke English, Dakota and French.

At times Miss Bishop became discouraged with her new life on the frontier. She wondered whether her words were having the smallest effect on these young minds. Yet she persevered.
And her students, and the students of other pioneer teachers ultimately built the Minnesota we know today.
· They founded our first mills, our first companies and developed our farms
· They created our education system, our parks system and our transportation system.
· They built our network of working, successful communities.
The quality of life we enjoy today is the legacy of their efforts. And it is now time for us to decide what legacy we will pass on to our children and the generations of Minnesotans that will follow them. Instead of the challenge of the frontier, we are now facing the challenge of a world in change.
Today our immediate focus is on the recession. It has affected all of us. Many Minnesotans have lost jobs and families are stretching their days and their pocketbooks to make ends meet. You do not need to be told that Minnesota's economy has seen better days. You know the reality.
But as a people, we have overcome much greater obstacles in our history. Many of us lived through the Great Depression. I can recall the end of the Depression when my mother would collect bags of discarded flour to bake bread and cookies to sell so that our family could pay the rent. It was not an easy time, but because our faith was strong and our values true - all of us endured.
As recently as the early 1980s Minnesota weathered a recession even more severe than the one we face today. Tens of thousands more people were unemployed then, and farm income fell to the lowest level since the Great Depression. But again we recovered, just as we will recover together from the hard times we are now facing.
This recession, like all recessions, will have limited duration. And we will recover because the fabric of our society is solid, our work ethic is strong, and we will stand together to make the sacrifices necessary to pull ourselves and our neighbors through. Tonight I will outline some of the actions we can take to attack the recession, and start putting Minnesotans back to work now.
But I am also convinced that we are facing a challenge much more significant than the recession. It is a challenge that goes to the heart of our tradition as an immigrant society.
For decades, the triumph of our lives has been the ability to give each new generation a better quality of life than the one we enjoyed. That ascending ladder has been a central part of the American experience. Today it is widely accepted that our children will be the first generation in American history to receive less from their parents than the generation before - the first generation to have fewer opportunities than we had when we were growing up.
More of our young people are worried about the future than ever before - 77%, according to one recent study. They worry because we have convinced them that they should. We lack confidence in the long-term future, and we are teaching our children to doubt
Yet in our hearts we all believe the United States and Minnesota in particular are the best places in the world to live and raise a family. What we need to do is remind ourselves of a simple fact - the state of the state will be whatever we choose to make it
The state of the state will be whatever we choose to make it

We can leave our children a state that is substantially stronger than the one w~ inherited - just as our parents did - if we are willing to draw upon the strength and integrity that have historically made this state and its people so exceptional. Children are our most important asset and we can measure our progress in the way our decisions affect their future.
The key to assuring that strength lies in identifying our objectives and making the decisions necessary to achieve them - no matter how tough those choices might be. It lies in recognizing that the good of Minnesota's people is more important than the good of any candidate or political party - and toning down political rhetoric so we can concentrate on the needs of our people.
Even amidst the rancor of the last legislative session, some very important things were accomplished:
· We identified K-12 education and early learning as priorities and - despite the need to close a $2 billion dollar shortfall we increased funding for both of these programs.
· We passed the most comprehensive wetlands protection bill in the nation.
· We advanced the cause of children by increasing funding for early childhood programs by $14 million.
· We increased funding for our children's health plan to allow coverage for 24,000 more children.
· We sent a signal to job creators by reducing commercial and industrial property tax rates.
· We adopted the nation's strongest grade crossing safety legislation.
· We began the difficult process of property tax reform by eliminating the 3% tax classification. And we had to do that because senior. citizens on fixed incomes were literally being taxed out of their homes.
· And we solved a $2 billion dollar shortfall without the strikes, massive lay-offs, shutdowns and costly special sessions that plagued so many other states.
To the members of the legislature who worked on those achievements, I say thank you for putting the future of Minnesota first.
The challenge of defining the Minnesota of the 90s is just beginning. Next week we start a legislative session that provides us with an eight week opportunity to look at our future and shape the state of the state on issues like health care access, education, and jobs. We can also squander the opportunity presented by that session with partisan rhetoric and political debate. It's our choice, and you and I need to work together to take the high road and make this session make a difference.
Nowhere can we make a more significant difference than by improving the quality of education.
When I was young, my immigrant parents told us education was the great leveling factor. They were right. Education brought my brothers and me out of poverty. It has brought generations of Americans out of poverty and it remains the single most reliable ticket to self-sufficiency and a rewarding life.
Among the fifty states, Minnesota's K-12 education system is universally recognized as an innovative leader. But unfortunately, being a leader in the nation is no longer good enough.
When our children graduate they will not compete simply with people from Iowa or North Dakota. Even if they never leave Minnesota - they will compete with students from Asia; Europe, and Canada. And if we expect them to win, we are going to have to change, and make our education system competitive with any in the world.
Minnesota 2000 is a program designed to drive that change. It is a statewide campaign to get every aspect of every community involved in the education process. It was inspired by an African proverb that states: "It takes an entire village to educate one child." That philosophy is the foundation of Minnesota 2000. Simply put, our goal is to improve education by increasing the level of community involvement.
We have set six ambitious education goals for Minnesota. And we intend to achieve these goals by the year 2000.
· First, all children should start school ready to learn.
· Second, every high school in the state should have a 90 percent graduation rate.
· Third, our students should master challenging academic subjects including English, math, science and geography.
· Fourth, our students must be first in math and science achievement.
· Fifth, every adult should be literate and possess the skills necessary to compete in a global economy.
· And finally, we must remove drugs and violence from our schools.
Our aim is nothing less than raising achievement to world-class levels for all learners. Are these optimistic goals? You bet they are. But they are achievable.

Last fall, 200 teachers, administrators, social workers, clergy, businessmen and. women, civic organizations, volunteers and parents assisted in the planning process for Minnesota 2000. Regional meetings will begin across Minnesota in April. I plan to attend, and I hope you will join me.
It is going to take this kind of effort to get education back where it should be - at the center of family and community life.
Minnesota 2000 defines an exciting vision. And that vision becomes more exciting when we blend it with the work of the children's commission I appointed one year ago.
Teachers tell us that increasing numbers of children are beginning their schooling unready to learn for reasons that have nothing to do with their learning abilities. More and more children are coming to school sick, hungry, tired distracted or abused. Too often TV has become the babysitter. And too often teachers and government are being asked to assume the role of a "parent".
Teachers cannot be expected to teach hungry children, and they cannot be expected to excite the mind of a child with low self-esteem. It's time to give teachers some help rather than blame them for problems over which they have no control.
We also have learned that bureaucracies - no matter how caring - cannot raise our children. We need to recognize that the challenge of learning readiness does not begin on the first day of school. It begins with the parent. We must develop an environment in which children can succeed in a value based system that reflects parental commitment.
Much of what we need to do is simple and accessible to every Minnesota family.
· We can make a point to spend quality time with each child 
· We can turn off the TV and help our children explore the world of reading 
· We can take our children to the zoo, the museum, the art gallery
It is as easy as taking a walk, going sledding or simply talking to one another..
While parents have an obligation to parent, we in government and in the community have an obligation to help responsible families succeed. And there is a great deal more we can do to help.
Minnesota is viewed as the leader in the nation when it comes to effective children's programs. We are not short on programs. We are not short on good programs. But we may be short on the coordination, flexibility and depth needed to turn children's lives around.
That is why we formed a children's commission last year - called Action for Children - to study the lives of young Minnesotans and make recommendations to help the state restructure programs and remove barriers to success for children and their families.
This commission will soon issue its first report which includes a broad range of recommendations, many of which deal with building bridges between programs, parents, children teachers and social workers.
Among the recommendations are: .
· Formation of a Children's Cabinet drawn from the state departments which affect children most. This group would assist in developing children's policies and budgeting children's programs.
· Integration of education, school, health and social services for children of all ages.
· Creation of an information system that is integrated across state agencies so that important information does not get lost when children move from program to program - and so that programs can coordinate their efforts.

The first report from the Children's Commission offers many sound ideas ... but perhaps most important, it brings us to the realization that we cannot isolate education from other problems affecting children. If a child is doing poorly in school - it may have little to do with the child's intelligence and a lot to do with low self-esteem or a serious problem at home. The state of the family reflects the state of the state.
We have the capacity to improve. We can take advantage of innovative programs like Communities-in-Schools - a program that grants funding to schools who bring social service programs into the school setting. And we can transport that model all across Minnesota. It's about time we combined social services and education to help those who need special help while allowing others to pursue their education without distraction.
We can expand our early learning programs such as Head Start. Our objective should be that every child has access to a nutritious breakfast. We must also make certain that every child has access to affordable health care.
When we open doors for children today, we open doors for the remainder of their lives.
But unfortunately, as important as it is for us to provide each child with access to opportunity, these measures alone will not build a strong future for the state if our children have to leave Minnesota to find the kinds of jobs they have been trained for. And we cannot preserve the unique diversity of our society if children educated in Greater Minnesota are forced to migrate to the Twin Cities to find work.
The truth is that the issues of education and job climate are inseparable. And in Minnesota, our job climate is as weak as our educational system is strong. A recent analysis of the national business climate rated Minnesota the most desirable place in the nation to live. But that same publication rated us as one of the ten worst states in the nation for job growth because of our high taxes, high workers' compensation costs, and a difficult regulatory climate.
9

The job climate issue touches each of our lives because every month, every year, jobs leave this state and Minnesota companies undertake their expansions elsewhere. And no single factor has played a greater role in costing Minnesota jobs than our high workers' compensation costs.
Minnesota workers compensation costs are 35 percent higher than those in Wisconsin, and 43 percent above costs in South Dakota - two of the principal states with which we compete. A major employer in South East Minnesota recently told me that he could save over $300,000 a year simply by moving his company a few hundred yards across the river to Wisconsin. Another bewildered company owner in South West Minnesota showed me how he could cut his workers compensation costs by 70 percent if he moved across the border into Iowa. Fortunately, they chose to stay. Many others chose to leave.
There is no reason the workers' compensation problem cannot be fixed in this legislative session if we have the courage to make the choice. There is a bipartisan proposal now before the legislature that would reform Minnesota's system and bring our costs into line with those of our principal competitors. It would no longer pay people more to stay home than to work. It controls medical costs without requiring additional state subsidies. And it makes the system easier to use and understand for workers who are injured on the job. I support that proposal.
In the late 1980s the legislature three times passed meaningful workers' compensation reform only to have it vetoed by the former Governor. I want to make it very plain that if the legislature passes the bi-partisan reform package, I will sign it. And with joblessness increasing across Minnesota, I cannot think of a reason for failing to act on the bill during this session. There is no more effective way to keep Minnesota jobs in Minnesota.
An equally strong priority for this legislative session is health care reform.
There are few needs as basic as the need for access to affordable health care. You and I are fortunate to live in a national health care center. People travel from around the world to access institutions like Rochester Mayo Clinic and St. Mary's Medical Center. Minnesota's medical provider community is large and diverse and our emphasis on prevention has produced health insurance rates 18 - 23 percent below the national average.
But these advantages are meaningless to the nearly seven percent of Minnesotans who have no medical coverage of any kind. And' with medical costs increasing between two and three times the rate of inflation each year, that seven percent figure is not likely to go down. Rising costs are pressuring Minnesota business at every level, and placing a growing burden on more than 17,000 self-employed farmers who lack legal authority to deduct more than a small percentage of their health insurance premiums.
I believe there is a national consensus in support of health care reform, and the time to begin that reform is now. Several months ago I prepared and legislative leaders introduced a plan called "HEART', which will phase in reforms designed to bring health care coverage within the financial reach of every Minnesota family. Other legislators, health providers and several business groups have offered similar, innovative proposals. The time has come for us to forget about pride of authorship, recognize that we are all working toward the same goal, and begin turning these proposals into reality.
The "health care crisis" is really two issues - assuring health care access, and controlling health care costs. I want the legislature to adopt legislation addressing both issues in the upcoming legislative session. At a minimum, that bill should:
· Provide every Minnesota child with access to affordable health care by removing financial barriers to health care coverage for Minnesota's 70,000 uninsured children.
· Give Minnesota farmers and other self-employed workers a fair shake by reforming the Tax Code to permit them to deduct 100% of their health insurance costs.
· Grant relief to small businesses by authorizing a basic health coverage package free from the multiple state mandates that are driving insurance costs out of the reach of so many independent businesses.
· Provide mechanisms to increase access to basic health care services in rural Minnesota.
· Include meaningful and realistic cost containment provisions.
Finally, it is essential that the bill have a financing mechanism that will cover its costs without requiring us to cut back other programs like education or human services to pay for the health care plan.
The HEART proposal achieves every one of these objectives.
We all recognize that Minnesota lacks the financial resources to resolve the entire health care access issue in a single year. But that is not a reason to delay beginning the process of finding a solution.
We are already recognized as the national leader in the quality of our health care system. There is no reason why we cannot adopt a plan in this legislative session that will make us the national leader in assuring access to that system.
We can also make meaningful improvement in our quality of life by adopting thoughtful reforms in our violence prevention, correction and crime victims assistance programs.
Last year, the incidence of violent crime, hate crimes and domestic abuse in Minnesota increased substantially. That is out of character with our society, and we need to reverse this trend before the public safety in the Twin Cities deteriorates as it has in other growing metropolitan areas.

Yesterday a group of legislative leaders joined me in announcing a comprehensive public safety package. Included in that package of more than sixty recommendations are:
· Greater protection for domestic assault victims.
· Truth in sentencing guidelines and strengthened penalties for DWI and crimes against people.
· Streamlined record-keeping systems to assist police in identifying and arresting suspects more quickly.
· Making sure that the sentence in any property related crime must include restitution of the losses of the victim.
A society that lives in fear has no quality of life. The recommendations in this package can stem the trend toward violent crime before it changes our society. Differences among legislators on these issues are not unresolvable, and I expect the legislature to pass a public safety improvement package before it adjourns this spring.
But we cannot lose sight of the fact that the responsibility for a violence free Minnesota goes beyond the legislature. While legislators do their part, you and I must do ours. The root causes of violence in our society begin in the home, on the playgrounds and on neighborhood streets. We each contribute to the tolerance of violence in subtle ways. The most important thing we can do to break the cycle of violence is to change our own attitudes. That means rejecting actions as subtle as a cruel word spoken in the home, or as vicious as the hate mail being directed toward minority groups in the Minneapolis community. There is no place for either in our society, and we need to stand together and say it.
The effort to make Minnesota violence free cannot be limited to a single week. It is a lifetime effort, with success and failure resting in your hands and mine. In crime as in so many other areas, the state of this state in future years is ours to
shape - and I think we are equal to the challenge.
While we work together to achieve these long-term reforms, there are immediate needs in Minnesota that must be addressed.
The effects of the national recession are being felt in every comer of this state. By national standards, our problem is not severe; our unemployment rate is 30 percent below the national average. But by Minnesota standards the human impact of these numbers is not acceptable.
No one should be naive enough to believe that a state the size of Minnesota can single-handedly affect the course of the national economy. But we do have a moral obligation to do everything within our power to lessen the impact of recession on our people. Through some simple common sense actions, we can provide jobs for thousands of Minnesotans right now, when they are needed most. And taking those actions should be the legislature's first priority when it returns on February 18.
There are more than $155 million dollars in labor intensive capital construction projects planned in Minnesota over the next two years. The need for those projects is not in dispute; many are already authorized. What we need to do is accelerate the construction schedule for these projects so they can begin now, when we need the jobs, rather than next year or the year after.
Although Minnesota's bonding authority is limited to three percent of revenues, we can also issue approximately $75 million dollars in capital construction bonds for badly needed schools and public infrastructure projects without exceeding the 3 percent limit.
These actions, taken together, would immediately create between 6,000 and 8,000 jobs. And because they involve accelerating projects rather than new spending programs, they will not worsen the budget shortfall, and will not require us to cut back other programs.

I have already issued an Executive Order authorizing the acceleration of $55 million dollars in labor intensive construction contracts. Those contracts will put approximately 2,000 Minnesota families to work. But I cannot implement the rest of the program without legislative approval.
This jobs bill is a fiscally sound way to create jobs for thousands of Minnesota families. It will pump tens of millions of dollars into our economy when our economy needs it most. I have made no secret of the fact that I am extremely disappointed that the legislature did not find time to act on this program during its January session. Families are hurting, and they need help now.
It's time for us to put politics and past disputes behind at least on this issue. When the legislature returns next week, let's work together to get this program adopted. We can all share the credit, as Minnesota's workers and their families share its benefits.
Unfortunately, while we pursue these opportunities we also have to face the difficult task of putting our own financial house in order.
Just as the recession has affected Minnesota workers, it. has affected the state itself. Income tax revenues are running more than $400 million dollars below projected levels, giving us a recession induced budget shortfall of approximately $343 million dollars. And frankly, the shortfall could increase when the February 28 forecast is released. We have no choice but to close that shortfall.
Why? The simple answer is that Minnesota law does not permit the state to carry a shortfall into the next biennium. But even if we had that authority, we would have to close the shortfall because of the damage it would do to every one of us if we resorted to long term borrowing.
The borrowing necessary to close this shortfall would cost Minnesota taxpayers between $100 and $120 million dollars in interest between now and the end of the next biennium. That represents over $100 million tax dollars that do not go to housing, do not go to education, and do not go to health care. They would instead be consumed in interest payments to whoever is willing to loan several hundred million dollars. to the state. That would be an indefensible use of taxpayer money.
It is also essential to remember that borrowing would lower Minnesota's bond rating - driving up the cost of schools, hospitals, highways and other capital improvements built with state bonds.
Failure to close the shortfall would make it more costly for Minnesota to maintain its social investments and its quality of life. It would also be the best way to ensure that our children will not have access to the same level of economic opportunity that we have enjoyed.
Unfortunately, there is no painless way to put the budget back in balance. There are only two ways to close the shortfall - spending reductions, or higher taxes. And I will do everything in my power to avoid a general tax increase.
I am going to have to propose remedies I do not want to propose, and the legislature will adopt spending cuts that. it doesn't want to vote on. But as Harriet Bishop discovered a century and a half ago, building the future requires sacrifices, difficult decisions and the courage to make the right choices. And I am well aware that you did not elect any public official to make only the easy decisions. I will do everything I can to minimize the pain, but there will be pain. We will cut back not because we want to but because we have to. And I sincerely hope we can achieve that solution through a bipartisan agreement.
Recession response, health care reform, workers' compensation reform, educational improvement and a better crime prevention program. These are Minnesota's priorities, and they are all achievable in the next legislative session. We can also elect not to act, if that's our choice. The state of the state, and the quality of life in our society, will be whatever we chose to make them. But I have no doubt that we are equal to the challenge of providing our children an even better future and an even stronger state than the one we inherited.Madam Speaker, fellow constitutional officers, former governors, members of the Supreme Court, and its newest member, Alan Page; appellate court justices under the new leadership of Paul Anderson; members of the Minnesota Legislature and especially our 50 new legislators - I want to say thank you for your commitment to serve.

I believe 1993 will be a year when we will be proud to say that we are Minnesotans. My optimism is based on the record that we have built together over the past two years:

· Today we have a health care system in Minnesota that is accessible and affordable to all hard-working families.

· We value our beautiful Minnesota environment so much that we protect it through the most comprehensive wetlands laws in the nation. It was our record in the area of water quality that motivated the National Audubon Society to honor our administration with an award for excellence in the environment - the only American elected official to receive this award in the last five years.

· We learned, and some may say we learned the hard way, that it is too expensive for companies to exist, let alone expand in Minnesota... so we reduced rates for worker's compensation and reduced the rates for commercial industrial property taxes.

· We said we're fed up and we're not going to take it anymore when it comes to crime. We now have stiffer penalties for a variety of crimes, particularly rape. We have put more dollars into violence prevention. And now we are seeking new laws against stalkers.

· And when it comes down to making those tough choices during the tightest financial times I've seen as an elected official, we have protected the funding for our children's education. We know what matters.

And we will close the gap between anticipated revenues and expenditures without a tax increase.
This is what happens when we choose to work together.
This legislature has earned a reputation for being visionary. When I talk to other governors and hear their stories I am reminded of how fortunate I am to work with a body that time and again shows that it knows how to get things done for the people of Minnesota.
We have proven that we can rise above the gridlock. And we will do it again. We must fmd the direct route to change and improvement in order to address the challenges that lie ahead.
Since becoming governor in 1991, I have spent a great deal of time listening to Minnesotans describe their concerns, their challenges, and most importantly, what their dreams are for the future. I listened as they talked and I heard Minnesotans say they want three things:
· First, people are concerned about getting and keeping good jobs. Those who have lost their jobs are suffering. Those who have had to settle for low-paying jobs are hurting. And those who have good jobs are worried about losing them. All of us can identify with what a job means to a family. That is why last month I proposed a plan that will help employers, especially small businesses, create more jobs for Minnesotans, the people who I believe are the most productive workers in America.
· Second, Minnesotans told me that they want to protect and enhance our very special quality of life - from our pristine natural resources to our exciting diversity of cultural attractions.
· And finally, a theme that resonated in every town from Rochester to Roseau as we traveled around the state for Minnesota Milestones: We want to say to every child, 'You can be anything you want to be.' We want to see every child come to school ready to learn, we want families to provide a stable environment for their children, we want all our children to be healthy and we want every young person to gain the skills needed to Compete in a global economy.


Tonight I want to focus this State of the State speech on the subject I hold closest to my heart - the needs of our children.
Two years ago, I appointed a commission to take a hard look at how we serve our children and their families. Under the leadership of Ron James and my wife Susan, the Action for Children Commission has turned out to be an excellent example of the results that can be accomplished through a partnership among businesses, communities, advocates for children and government.
In the course of its work, the commission tried to answer two simple questions: First, how much money are we, as a state, spending each year on children? Second, what kinds of results are we getting?
The commission identified at least 250 children's programs, administered through 33 different state agencies, boards and commissions, costing Minnesota taxpayers $4.5 billion dollars a year.
Over the years, with the very best of intentions, we have created a tangled, bureaucratic web of children's programs. I would guess that not one of us in this chamber can name all of them. We have created too many individual government specialty shops. And we invite our customers to wait in line to see if they might be able to squeeze into the narrow product we are selling. If they cannot, they trudge on to the next shop.
Families and children who need help are frustrated by the complexity of the system and often do not get the kind of help they need. They end up working with dozens of case workers, counselors and eligibility specialists who are connected back to a confusing maze of inflexible programs. Our children are being divided into pieces by a system that is largely government centered and difficult to use.
And what are the results? Too many of our children are failing. Maybe they aren't your children or mine, but in every school there are children who are being left behind. And when these young people act out, they affect the way all our children learn. Eventually, we all pay for failed outcomes.


Every child deserves our very best. Nowhere is there more hope and potential than in the curious face of a two-year old, and nowhere is there more tragedy than in the angry face of a 13 year-old who cannot adequately read, nor more disappointment than in the face of a 17-year-old who has just been told he has no marketable job skills.
We need to give our young people more options.
Gwen Marshall from Minneapolis is just one example. Gwen graduated years ago with average grades from North High School. She was married, had a daughter, and was later divorced. As a single parent, she worked full-time during the day and sometimes held evening jobs in retail sales. Eventually the draining routine, the day care payments and being away from her young daughter got to be too much, so she quit her jobs and went on AFDC.
To her credit, Gwen enrolled in a skilled trades program at St. Paul Technical College last year, 17 years after she graduated from high school. She will complete the program this summer and someday wants to teach at a high school or a technical college. I have met Gwen, and I am confident she will attain any goal to which she aspires. She is with us this evening. Gwen Marshall in the center balcony.
But we have not been fair to the Gwen Marshalls of Minnesota, and there are many of them. Today I would like to promise you Gwen that we can and we will give your daughter more career options.
In my own life, education has meant everything. If it were not for the unique opportunities that I had, and the sturdy encouragement I received from my parents, I know this: I would not be here tonight, and I suspect the same is true for most of you.
Gwen's story illustrates that the system that has served most of us and our parents so well for so long is no longer adequate. In Minnesota, we can arid must do better.
The high-performance employers of today demand high skills from every employee at every level. Employers allover the state are telling me they cannot find the kinds of qualified workers they need. They are frustrated by the widening skills gap.


· The results of a recent Trade and Economic Development survey tell us that 70 percent of Minnesota companies report difficulty in recruiting skilled and technical workers.
· In a brand new survey of 351 Minnesota businesses conducted by the Minnesota Business Partnership, 52 percent of Twin Cities employers believe today's job applicants lack adequate basic skills in reading, writing and math.
Ninety percent said they would like to see Minnesota high school graduates be
certified as meeting minimum standards.
· Another large Minnesota employer reports that 75 percent of the Minnesota youth applying for jobs with their company cannot pass the company's basic employment exam.
· A manager of one of Minnesota's most prestigious technology companies told us his company finds better qualified high school graduates in Guadalajara, Mexico, than in Minnesota. That bothers me.
We do not have a job shortage in Minnesota - we have a skills shortage. And I fear that this skills shortage will eventually drive high-skills jobs out of the state.
This is not the fault of our children. It is not the fault of our teachers or schools or communities. The blame largely rests with a fragmented system that sends out mixed messages to our children; a system that has not yet recognized that our children will compete in a world economy.
Our young people deserve a bigger, better package of education and training possibilities. Students need linkages to the rapidly changing, increasingly technological world.
In Minnesota, we have begun to address some of these problems. We have created, for the first time, a Children's Cabinet consisting of all the state government department heads whose agencies provide services to children and families. This executive level cabinet has taken an inventory of all children's programs in the state and formulated Minnesota's first integrated children's budget.


I can assure you that this budget, which reflects the needs of Minnesota's children, will be
my number one priority this session. We will protect our overall spending on children from budget cuts.
In other areas too, Minnesota's leadership on behalf of children is being recognized on the national level.
· We are a leading candidate to receive a multi-million dollar grant from a major national foundation to completely reinvent the way we serve families and children.
· A team of Minnesota educators will receive up to $14 million from a national fund to design new kinds of schools that will serve as community learning centers for people of all ages.
· We are distinctive among all states in our commitment to Head Start. Minnesota is one of only a handful of states that invest in Head Start beyond what the federal government gives us. And we increased our commitment by 30 percent last year.
But we need to do more.
TONIGHT I AM PROPOSING THE NEXT LOGICAL STEP - TO BRING TOGETHER, FOR THE FIRST TIME, PROGRAMS THAT ADDRESS THE NEEDS OF CHILDREN AND THEIR FAMILIES.
What I am proposing tonight is nothing less than an overhaul of our system from top to bottom - an agenda for change, to keep Minnesota in a national leadership position on children and families, and to prepare our young people for the work force of the 21st Century.
Our administration is committed to putting our customers first, and in Minnesota, children are our number one customer. It is time we reorganize around the needs of today's child, to start with the child, and carefully build out from there a complement of services at the local level that makes sense and leads to successful, confident kids.


I recognize these proposals are significant, and therefore will not pass without a great deal of controversy and spirited debate. But Representative Willard Munger told me two years ago, and I quote, "If something isn't controversial, it's probably no damn good anyway." I tend to agree with you, Willard.
WHAT WE ARE PROPOSING IS TO CREATE A NEW DEPARTMENT - THE MINNESOTA DEPARTMENT OF CHILDREN AND EDUCATION SERVICES.
Let me repeat that. We are proposing to create a new department - the Minnesota Department of Children and Education Services - to address the needs of the total child, from
infancy through the teenage years. Creating a new department will mean dramatically
changing, and in some cases, abolishing, existing agencies. But we cannot let long-standing battles over turf and reverence for institutions stop us from taking meaningful steps for children and their families.
What will this mean to children and families who need help? It will mean that for the first time, there will be a single agency responsible for cutting through the bureaucratic tape on behalf of children. It will mean that a single agency head can be held accountable for producing better results. It will mean that· families can be more assured of finding and getting comprehensive help in one convenient location. And it will mean that every child will have a better shot at success.
Changes are already taking place in Minnesota that reflect this new approach of putting children, not systems, first. This new department will support those community-based efforts. We have learned that some of the most effective programs, such as Head Start, work best because they involve families in all aspects of the program and they rely on local community involvement.
We will use this philosophy throughout the Department of Children and Education Services as we bring in programs in addition to Head Start such as Early Childhood Family Education, Early Childhood Screening, Learning Readiness, Way to Grow, Even Start, the Children's Trust Fund and a host of others that focus on those critical years in a child's life from birth to kindergarten enrollment.
By reinventing the way we serve these young children, we will begin to make some sense out of a fragmented, disjointed system.


In addition to reorganizing at the state level, we will offer incentives to local officials, Community Action agencies, schools, parents and non-profits to forge a new partnership around the needs of children and families. Our budget proposal, which will be unveiled in 12 days, will include $10 million dollars in new grants to be awarded to communities who develop collaborative ways to help children and responsible families succeed, and who make a commitment to measuring results for children.
Because education is such an important part of our children's lives, we invite educators to join in a dynamic partnership with the whole array of other children's services. To do this, we will propose that the education services currently provided by the Department of Education be incorporated into the new Department of Children and Education Services.
This new department will carry forward the commitment we have made to make our
education system one that is driven by results.
We have talked about standards in education long enough. It is time to take action. To set
standards. To set them high, and to measure the results.
Having serious, measurable standards will assure us that no child will slide through high school without basic skills. These new benchmarks ultimately will bring a more individualized approach to teaching and learning, because once these standards are in place, the state is going to step back and simply send the money and resources educators need to help students achieve this level of competency.
No more micro-management. No more state regulations about how many hours of French or geography a child needs. We will stop piling on our teachers every social goal that should be delivered by families, churches and other institutions.
We are going to let local schools do their jobs. We will free teachers up to teach. Our focus at the state level will only be on outcomes.
We will ask the Department of Children and Education Services to determine and assess educational standards so that by about the 10th grade, our students will have mastered a rigorous set of academic skills. As students pass through this gateway of achievement, we can be assured that every one of them has the basic skills needed to proceed on to the next level.


In addition to assuring that no child is left behind in their early years, we must begin to address the job training needs of our young adults. Which brings me to the next major part of our proposal this evening, and it has to do with 'how we prepare our young people for the high-skill, high-wage jobs of tomorrow.
I PROPOSE THAT MINNESOTA MOVE AGGRESSIVELY TO CREATE OUR OWN SYSTEM OF YOUTH APPRENTICESHIPS - THAT WE FORGE A NEW PARTNERSHIP WITH BUSINESS, EDUCATION, LABOR AND GOVERNMENT THAT WILL WIDEN THE OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE TO OUR YOUNG PEOPLE.
I am proposing tonight that we commit to giving our young people more meaningful options while they are in high school - options that will compel them to stay in school, work hard, gain hands-on training in a high-skill occupation and, at the end of four years, secure a well-paying job.
To the 20 percent of Minnesotans who complete a four-year degree, our education system may appear to be working just fine. But 80 percent of Minnesotans never complete such a degree. We need a new focus on the 16- to 20-year-olds who are at risk of leaving the education system without the skills needed to enter a secure high-wage career.
We need to place a special emphasis on reaching out to our at-risk youth - children of color, children in poverty, children who learn best in a hands-on environment, children who now are falling through the cracks of our system into a future of despair.
With a youth apprenticeship program in place, students will have the option of pursuing college preparation courses or a combination of academic classes and hands-on job training during their last two years of high school.
Will this kind of learning program trap our kids into making narrow, one-way choices? Absolutely not. Will it give all teenagers and young adults more options? You bet.
Work-based learning will put a solid floor under a young person's career. Many will take this experience and go on to a college or university later. That is how it works in Europe. For example, one third of all practicing engineers in Germany went through apprenticeship programs first, and then went on to the university for further education.


This youth apprenticeship program will also be coordinated by the new Department of Children and Education Services.
In my budget message later this month I will also propose establishing Education and Training Accounts for every young Minnesotan. For those students whose families are less able to save for training and education, we will contribute to their accounts. We will challenge philanthropies, employers and parents to save through these accounts so that no young person will stand at the threshold of training opportunities without the resources to participate.
This new department will serve as a school-to-work bridge for students; linking students with training and linking trained students with good jobs.
We recognize that industry, in partnership with labor and educators, is the key to this youth apprenticeship program. For employers who participate, this means finding new resources for training and finding the money in today's tough economic climate to pay the wages that students will earn during training.
But business will ultimately see that, long term, this is an investment that brings powerful returns.
Honeywell has already stepped forward with an offer to open up 80 apprenticeship spots within their Minnesota facilities. Jim Renier, CEO of Honeywell is with us tonight, and on behalf of all Minnesotans I want to say thank you Jim, for your leadership.
Minnesota employers have established a number of meaningful partnerships with local high schools, technical schools and colleges. But tonight I am calling upon them to do much more.
Now we must also recognize that government alone will never be good at rearing children. Every sector of the community must playa role.
Parents, especially, must take an active role. There is only one place where children can learn that they are lovable, capable human beings, and that is at home. It is up to parents to teach their children the importance of responsibility and the rewards of hard work.


Our young people must come to grips with the fact that learning demands their rigorous participation. It does not occur through osmosis, it is not a spectator sport and it is not free. Minnesota taxpayers are paying more than $6,000 per year to educate each student and we expect hard work in return. I want to make sure that students are working hard on their .education.
It was shocking to me to learn that Minnesota leads the nation in the number of youth employed in the work force, with 69 percent of Minnesota teenagers working an average of 24 hours a week. Teachers tell me that these students come to school tired and unprepared. The 1992 Minnesota Student Survey confirms that grades drop off dramatically for those students who work 20 or more hours per week. This tells us that too many young people today are being held back by peer pressure to earn money and by a culture tied to cars, clothes and CDs.
We must introduce a new seriousness into the business of learning and communicate that seriousness to our kids. We will propose legislation this month to limit youth who have not yet completed high school from working more than 20 hours per week during the school year.
IN SUMMARY, TONIGHT I HAVB OUTLINED A PROPOSAL THAT WILL BRING TOGETHER THREE DYNAMIC SUPPORT SYSTEMS INTO ONE COHESIVE DEPARTMENT FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH.
· First we will bring together all those critical programs for our youngest children before they enter kindergarten.
· To this we will add educational programming for elementary and secondary students with an emphasis on setting rigorous academic standards for all students.
· And then we will add the third piece, and what is now the missing link, career preparation in the form of youth apprenticeship training for our young adults.
This new department will support a seamless, community-based approach to serving young people in Minnesota.

It is an ambitious agenda, and I look forward to discussing these proposals and others with you. But there is a sense of urgency. Our work force is in stiff competition with workers in other countries. Real wages in America have declined in the past 20 years. I know that President-elect Bill Clinton understands these issues very well, because I have worked with him and the governors of other states to put these issues on the national agenda. I say tonight to President-elect Clinton: Minnesota is ready to work with you to lead the nation in making America's work force the best in the world. What we're talking about tonight is a new team effort, and every player must pitch in and work hard in order to win - government, business, parents, children, all of us. If we start today and work together, our kids will come out on top. Thank you very much.Thank you Mayor Hazama. Speaker-Designate Anderson, fellow constitutional officers, Governor Harold Stassen, Governor Elmer Anderson, members of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeals, members of the Minnesota Legislature and friends.
Nearly four years ago, I called Joanell Dyrstad and asked her to be my running mate as lieutenant governor. I feel extremely fortunate, and Minnesotans are fortunate, that she chose to say yes that day. She has served our state and its people with a great deal of intelligence, tenacity and concern for the real issues that affect people., It was with great regret that I accepted her decision to run for the U.S. Senate, but I respect that decision and wish her all the very best.
Lieutenant Governor Dyrstad, thank you ever so much.
Thank you all for being here with me in Rochester, the best place to live in the entire country according to Money Magazine, and probably according to many of you here today. We came here because the Rochester area represents so much of what is good and so much of what is changing in our state.
Rochester is home to a vital computer industry that has and will continue to thrive amid turbulence; and it is also home to a world-renowned health care giant, the Mayo Clinic, which exemplifies Minnesota's reputation for excellence.
This is an important day for all of Minnesota as we reflect on where we are, and where it is that we want to be as we approach the 21st century.

As I stand here today, I can say, with more confidence than I have had since the 1970s, that Minnesota is back on track. And we now have an unparalleled opportunity to forge ahead... into a future that is certain to be brighter for ourselves and for our children.
Two months ago, I became a grandfather for the very first time. I honestly did not expect it to be quite such a moving experience. Having a new little granddaughter only reaffirmed what I have known for years - that our job is to do what is right for the longterm. and build a better Minnesota to leave to our children:
· We want it to be a Minnesota in which violent crime is no longer an ever-present threat, where people know and care about one another and our streets and schools are safe.
· We want it to be a place where Minnesotans can find secure and promising jobs.
· And we want it to be a Minnesota in which your kids and my kids and their kids - our grandchildren - will know that if they are responsible, caring, honest and hard working - they will achieve their dreams.
Three years ago, when I delivered my first State of the State message, Minnesota was headed in the wrong direction.
Our administration inherited an immediate 200 million-dollar budget shortfall, and faced a 1.8 billion-dollar projected gap between spending and revenue. Today, three years later, we are looking at a projected surplus of 430 million dollars.
We chose the tough road, but it was the right road.
First, we put the brakes on runaway spending. During the 1980s, the growth in state government exceeded the growth in people's paychecks by 15 percent. Since then, we have frozen the number of state employees, held the growth of government to the growth in personal income, implemented a wage freeze, and cut welfare for able-bodied adults.


None of these things were easy. But if we had not made the tough choices when we did - we would have had. to raise taxes. And if we had chosen to solve the problem we inherited with income taxes, Minnesotans would have seen a permanent income tax increase of 23 percent - 340 dollars for every family of four with an income of $40,000. That is what we prevented. 
In the process, we' quickly became the target of nearly every entrenched and powerful spending system in Minnesota. And as we were being attacked by all the forces that resists change - it was then that I knew we were doing something right.
Today, Minnesota is back on track and charging ahead with vigor. We can all take pride in the fact that Financial World magazine just ranked Minnesota the third best managed state in America and we have regained our AAA credit rating.
We have set priorities: putting job creation, improving the lives of children and fighting crime at the top of our list.
In the past three years, we have taken dramatic steps that will enhance Minnesota's quality of life for years to come.
· Together with the Minnesota Legislature, we implemented sweeping health care reform to bring down the cost of health care for all Minnesotans without penalizing employers, taking away competition, or jeopardizing the outstanding quality of our health care in this state. Minnesota is now looked upon as a national model for health care reform.
· We have launched environmental policies that are nationally recognized, including the most comprehensive wetlands protection legislation in the country, and a far-reaching effort to clean up the Minnesota River.
· In the devastating floods of 1993 we all came together to help those affected. As chairman of the Midwestern Governors' Association, it was my privilege to lead a delegation of governors to Washington to tell congress about the very real, long-term impact of the floods on our people. As a result of that effort, we came home with 446 million dollars, or twice as much aid as Washington had intended to give us.

· I am proud of our work on behalf of Minnesota's children. Despite the state's severe financial crisis, we have directed substantially more resources to children each year, and we are spending those dollars much more effectively on programs that work .... on early learning, education, children's health, youth apprenticeship, parent education, child abuse prevention, child support enforcement and nutrition programs.
As I travel the state, visiting with Minnesota parentS and their children I realize how much more is left to be done.
· Today Minnesota has an nationally recognized education system that allows for school choice and charter schools, and we have talented, innovative educators who help our students to achieve world class test scores. Our post-secondary institutions now have a clear sense of purpose and are poised to meet the work force needs of the 21st century.
· We have kept our promises to those who create jobs by curbing the costs of doing business here, with a specific focus on reforming workers' compensation and reducing commercial and industrial property tax rates.
We helped Northwest Airlines through a critical time - maintaining the Twin Cities as one of the few major international transportation gateways in the country and preserving 17,000 direct jobs, plus another 60,000 that depend on the airline for survival.
Minnesota is clearly back on track. But one thing stands squarely in the way of our progress, and that is violent crime.
Unlike other crises we have faced, such as floods and bitter cold snaps, violence pulls us apart - not together -- and tugs at the core values that have made this state great. Violence has caused us to change our lifestyles, trust other people less, and to be afraid always for ourselves and our loved ones.


In 1992 and 1993 we took bold measures to stop violence in its tracks by passing the toughest and most comprehensive crime bill in Minnesota's history. We lengthened, and in many cases quadrupled, prison sentences for a long list of violent crimes involving murder, rape, possession of guns in schools, and drive-by shootings. We passed an antistalking law, giving women and other victims of stalking the means to put their assailants in jail.
We instituted a new truth-in-sentencing policy meaning that all convicted criminals serve all of their time. Thirty years means three decades under lock and key.
Many of us can fondly recall our own childhoods in a simpler time, when teachers cited their biggest discipline problems as students running in the halls and chewing gum in class, when neighbors relied on one another and kept an eye out for each other's children. And when murders were something that happened in faraway places, not to kids who live down the street.
How many of our veterans, who risked and lost lives on foreign soil, would have ever believed that the biggest threat to our safety would someday come from within our own communities? How many would have believed then that in 1994, a substantial percentage of Minnesotans would be afraid to walk at night in their own neighborhoods?
We cannot go back, but we can pull together. We can adopt realistic short- and longterm changes now that will restore our trust and remove dangerous predators from the streets.
A Minneapolis police officer recently told me he thought it was time we do more than manage crime. It's time we start fighting it.
H we are serious about fighting crime, we are going to have to make some changes:
· First, we must stop the six percent of the people who are committing 70 percent of the crimes. That means targeting our resources to the most dangerous -- the people we are afraid of.

· I have asked the legislature for a "three-time loser" law that guarantees a 15-year mandatory minimum sentence for those convicted of a third violent crime. With this law in place, it's three times, and you're off the streets and in prison for at least 15 years.
· We must aggressively deal with the 60 percent rise in juvenile crime since 1988.
· We must send a clear message that in Minnesota, violent criminals, young and old, will be held accountable.
· We must not wipe clean the records of serious juvenile offenders when they reach 18. And we must make absolutely certain that regardless of their age, cold calculated criminals are dealt with aggressively - as adults -- and with as much sympathy and compassion as they show their own victims.
Sixteen year-old Jason Williams is just one example. He had come into contact with at least 10 police departments before he broke into a Brooklyn Park home just over a year ago. He spent the entire day there, eating, drinking and watching television until the owner arrived home with her two small children.
Williams murdered her, then killed one of the children and left the other for dead.
He then took her car, her cash and her wedding ring and picked up his friends for an exciting night out on the town.
The pain of this nightmare will always remain. We cannot change that - only offer our support and our prayers. But we can change a juvenile justice system that failed to stop Jason Williams earlier - that failed to show him swift, sure consequences when he was arrested for theft and assault earlier.
What scares us more than the crimes sometimes are the attitudes of these young predators is the total lack of remorse. Existing laws are not effective in dealing with this tidal wave of brutal, violent youth.
6

I intend to create structured summer camps and reinforce community programs for those young people who are teetering on the edge. Youth workers tell me they can predict with a great deal of accuracy which children are most likely to fall into a life of crime. We must target our efforts, reach out, and catch these kids before they fall into life of street crime.
I want to dismantle ridiculous data privacy laws that prevent teachers, police and social workers from sharing basic information about dangerous young people. Today a police officer is required to tell school officials if a minor has been caught drinking beer, but that same officer is forbidden to let the school know if a kid is accused of murder.
We must give our teachers the assistance they need to maintain order in the classroom. They need the authority to use reasonable force to control violent young renegades who systematically shatter the learning process for all students. It is crazy that we have let some kids run the show for so long.
We can do all these things - make all these changes - in 1994, and they will have a tremendous impact. But prisons, prosecutors and punishment cannot stop the pipeline of children who are growing up angry, afraid and increasingly violent right now.
Violence is rooted in a fundamental breakdoWn of the family. Sure, there are other factors that perpetuate violence such as drugs, unemployment, alcohol and poverty. And certainly the media and the entertainment industry perpetuate violence with their glorification of murder and criminal behavior.
But thousands of strong families have overcome these obstacles and demonstrated that a strong and caring home life can give children the solid foundation they need, not just to endure all the risk factors, but to excel, to thrive and to succeed.
We cannot let Minnesota become a state of victims - always blaming government or teachers or social workers or police or employers for what happens to us. We can take charge of our destiny; and we are responsible for our actions.
We cannot be afraid to talk anew about values. Values are not something that died with our pioneering ancestors. Most of us believe very deeply in things like individual responsibility, mutual respect, hard work, trust and honesty. We believe in the inherent strength of families and we want close-knit communities.


We must take these values with us. They must be part of our future.
Government can reflect these values with a reconstructed welfare system. Last week I proposed a comprehensive reform plan that gives people who apply for welfare whether they have lived in Minnesota 20 years or two days - a job, not a check.
I have asked the legislature to reverse policies that now make Minnesota a magnet for people who choose not to work. Let's face the facts: 42 percent of those on welfare in Hennepin County moved here within the past year; and 600 convicted criminals in our state prisons lived in Minnesota less than two years before being sentenced. Minnesota taxpayers are tired of importing trouble and dependency from other states. It's time to close the gates.
We want to remove the barriers to working and the excuses for not working. We must get rid of all the backward incentives that now reward dependency, reward unemployment, reward having children out-of-wedlock and reward families who self-destruct.
The new system is designed to help people stand proudly on their own two feet with a broad range of support including health care, transportation and child care. But after two years, if you refuse to participate, then we refuse to prop you up anymore.
Government can support strong family values by holding both parents responsible for their kids:
· We must bluntly explain the realities of parenting to all our high school youth so they fully understand that having a child is a life-long emotional and financial commitment.
· We must continue to tighten-up child support enforcement to hold both parents responsible for the well-being of their children.
· We must require teenage moms who apply for welfare to live with their parents, and either work or go to school.
· And we must require parents to accompany their kids in court.


These are some of the things that government can do to reflect the values of responsibility and strong families in Minnesota.
still, all the government policies in the world cannot save us if we abandon values of individual responsibility.
Government cannot raise children.
Being a good parent today is one of the toughest jobs there is. To all Minnesota parents, including the divorced moms and dads, who manage to go to the parent-teacher conferences, coach the soccer teams arid take their kids camping - to those of you who are there for your kids, despite your own struggles, thank you. Your kids need you desperately, and Minnesota does too.
Strong families are the real key to a more cohesive, less violent future.
But there must be much more to our vision than stopping crime. Violence is a barrier, and as we overcome that formidable barrier we must commit ourselves to a plan that gives all of us reason to believe in tomorrow.
That vision must be one of opportunity - and jobs.
Everything we have come to cherish hinges upon our ability to grow and keep jobs in Minnesota - our schools, our health care, our state parks, our roads and the integrity and safety of our communities. A decent job can give a family independence, stability and a reason to dream about the future.
That is why jobs have been, and continue to be, the long-term focus of this administration.
When I talk about jobs, I am talking about good jobs -- jobs that require knowledge and skill - jobs that are rewarding, that pay well and offer opportunities for promotion. I am talking about entrepreneurs and small businesses, because they offer the greatest potential for more and better jobs in Minnesota.
We care about jobs, we must care deeply about education, because employers today need skilled, able and competent workers.


For the first time in decades, we are setting our academic sights higher in Minnesota with the development of new graduation standards. These standards are being drafted over the next several months. I want them to be clear, objective and easy to measure. I want them to reflect basic academic skills such as math, science, communications, and geography - abilities that our children need to compete in the world economy.
If we care about jobs, we must understand the urgency of the changes we need to make to bring down the cost of doing business here.
Minnesota workers are known for their hard work and high skills. So why is it that so many are constantly worried about holding on to their jobs? The answer is simple: it costs more to do business here.
In 1992 a total of 10 manufacturers - collectively employing nearly 900 people -- moved out of Minnesota: to South Dakota, Wisconsin, Nebraska, North Dakota, Kansas and Missouri. Eight of these 10 firms cited high workers compensation costs or burdensome taxes as the most significant factor in their overall decision to move.
We have made changes since then, but they are not nearly enough. We must bring down workers compensation costs this year. We will put a proposal before the legislature that we know will result in lower costs, higher efficiency and has proven to work in Wisconsin. This proposal.has had the support of both labor and management in that state for years.
I will ask each and every legislator to do that which they know is right, vote for jobs and vote "yes" on this proven reform plan.
If we care about jobs, we must take a long-term pledge not to raise taxes - not now and not for years to come. Government can and must live within its means.
In fact, this year I want to begin to phase out a burdensome sales tax on replacement capital equipment that penalizes manufacturers from expanding and creating new jobs in Minnesota. Computers and equipment don't pay taxes, people do. And this tax is hurting a lot of hard-working people.


These are critical steps to bringing jobs to Minnesota. But if we want to make more of these kinds of changes - changes that are good for people and good for jobs -- changes that lead to less government and more opportunity for people to succeed - then we need term limits in Minnesota.
When a legislator sits in the house or the senate for decades at a time, he or she can loose touch with the broad based concerns of people. Over time, the entrenched lawmaker accumulates far more power and influence than his newer colleagues and grows dependent upon powerful spending lobbies and special interest groups.
I am for term limits. But the legislature has repeatedly rejected my attempts to let Minnesotans vote on this issue. Members of the legislature, we must let the people decide, and decide in 1994.
· Because we care about jobs, we have begun to make government less of a barrier, and sometimes even a partner, in job growth.
· We can help bring technology and assistance to companies to help them increase productivity.
· We are creating one-stop shopping to help businesses find their way more quickly through the maze of government regulations.
· And we continue to promote Minnesota products and services around the globe.
Today Minnesota has a lot to say to the world.
When I visit with intemational leaders I tell them that Minnesota is back on track and open for business. 130,000 new Minnesota jobs have been created since 1991. We now rank ninth in the nation in job growth.
We have so much on which to build. Minnesota has a massive financial service industry, a vital bio-technology corridor, a growing list of environmental service companies, a dynamic printing industry, a booming medical alley, a renewed computer sector, a solid agri-business industry and a critical manufacturing base that is just starting to improve.
11

There is a new economic confidence in Minnesota that we have not seen in decades.
Banner Engineering is just one example -- a Plymouth company that just announced it will open a new plant in Fergus Falls, employing 150 people. Four years ago, when faced with the decision of where to locate a new plant, President and founder Bob Fayfield chose South Dakota.
This year, citing a turn-around in Minnesota's business climate, and a new pro-jobs attitude in state government he selected rural Minnesota. Bob is here today and I thank him for his confidence. But he says there is still much more to be done - and Bob, wholeheartedly agree.
The years just ahead hold out tremendous potential for Minnesota. We have every reason to believe that the best is not behind us, but rather lies directly ahead.
We will not get there by accident. You and I must commit ourselves to a path that will lead us to safe communities, strong families and good jobs. We must not be afraid to embrace the values that have made this state a shining star -- values of individual responsibility, respect, trust, hard work and honesty.
When I look at my own three children and my brand new granddaughter - I want so much for them. I want them to have more opportunities - more than I did. I want your children and my children and the young people here today to inherit a better world and a better state than we did. And I believe they will.
Minnesota is back on track. We know where we're going. Working together, we can get there from here.Mr. Speaker, President of the Senate, fellow constitutional officers, distinguished former governors, members of the supreme court, members of the cabinet, fellow Minnesotans...
Today we are at a crossroads. As I mentioned in my Inaugural address, there is a tremendous transition going on - in Washington, in Minnesota and in every state in the union. We are witnessing the most significant change of direction in national policy since President Franklin Delano Roosevelt created the New Deal.
In 60 years, we have gone from a nation with too little centralized power to a nation with way too much. And instead of making intelligent changes during the 1950s, 60s, 70s and 80s, we allowed more layers of government to be created. In the process we built up a wall between the citizen and his or her government. Today that wall is coming down.
The taxpayers will be heard and this legislative session is the taxpayers' session.
I want to make one thing absolutely crystal clear and that is that we, as a state, cannot choose to do nothing. That was made abundantly clear last week when a report entitled "Within Our Means" by Minnesota Planning documented that Minnesota has a structural budget gap - a gap that will add up to $25 billion by the year 2005. It is caused by changing demographics, which we cannot control, but also by our spending choices, which we can control. And rest assured, we will control spending.
Over the next ten years, we will experience major increases both in the number of school-age children and in the number of Minnesotans reaching retirement age; and together these factors will create an enormous bulge in government costs. Combine this with the expection that the number of working people - taxpayers - will level off, and we are left with a gaping hole between spending and tax revenues.

The report made it clear that if we continue to spend the way we spend today, Minnesota will be facing budget cut upon budget cut over the next 10 years. Something has to give, and in Minnesota, it will not be the taxpayer.
So the challenge of this transition is to learn to live within the new fiscal realities of our time - to do things differently. And within that context we must be very disciplined in identifying exactly what our priorities will be.
The people of Minnesota have made their priorities abundantly clear:
· They want a government that lives within its means and that means no general tax increases;
· They want an educational system that will allow their children to emerge as winners in the world economy. And they want communities and schools and streets that are free from violence.
· And they want a smarter, more efficient and more local government;
I want us to think anew about state government and push the highest degree of accountability down to the lowest level of governance.
On the national scene, we are seeing a shifting of power from the federal government to the states. Central to our budget proposal is an unprecedented plan to begin to shift the power of government back to the people. Let us launch an all-out war on expensive and ridiculous mandates be they from the federal government or from the state.
As governor, I can tell you how federal mandates have often taken common sense out of the work place.
For example, the federal government now requires that a full 10 percent of prison cells in each of our state prisons be wheelchair accessible. In Minnesota, 10 percent equals 400 cells. Yet here in Minnesota, we only have 20 inmates - yes 20 inmates - using wheelchairs, and 14 of them are in the geriatric prison in Faribault. So unless this mandate is lifted, we will be forced to spend millions and millions of taxpayer dollars to create accessible space for 400 disabled inmates that we don't have.
2

I'm for access and equality, but this is an absurdity. Once again, we see the great wall erected between the common sense of the people and the determined will of the political elite who always seem to know better.
At the state level, that wall will come down.
We will shift power away from the state bureaucracy back to the people. And we will do it by removing burdensome mandates and allowing communities to set their own priorities and make their own decisions through the use of flexible funding in the form of block grants.
Give people the tools and they will be far more creative and far more effective than any centralized government could ever be.
For example, in Rush City I visited a family center used by all of the families in the community - rich and poor, one-parent and two, struggling and successful. The center was built by the community, literally - they built the climbing equipment, and a local businessman generously donated the space. At this center kids can get their immunizations, parents can get support from other parents and families who are struggling can get the help they need. They did this with a block grant.
As more and more people get involved locally, they need and deserve more information about how their local tax dollars are spent. Minnesotans want us to provide meaningful information about how much each service costs and who is charging them for that service. And so we will introduce a substantial revision of "truth-in-taxation" so that every Minnesotan knows what they are getting and at what price.
State and local governments must also change. Today more than half of the state budget is returned to local governments. All of us can be more efficient. I support restructuring at the state level and our administration will drive those changes. But all management decisions must rest with the managers, not the legislature. And any changes we make must result in, one, cost savings for the taxpayer and, two, improved service to the taxpayer.
Let us not reorganize to make ourselves feel better - let's do it to give the people of Minnesota more value for their dollar.
3

And while the nation as a whole contemplates great change, I think it is only fitting that the Minnesota Legislature let the people participate in shaping the size and scope of their government. There is no better example of costly duplication in this state than the continuation of a burdensome two house system and it's ab~ut time we allowed the people to vote on a unicameral legislature.
And the people must be given the opportunity to vote on term limits. No legislative body has the right to maintain the big wall that protects them from the people.
I want to redefine the role of government to become a flexible agent of opportunity, not a road block to success.
There is no more tragic example of the misuse of mandates than the federal mandates on welfare.
Today we have a system that rewards teenagers for having children out of wedlock. We have a system that tells people the more children they have, and the less they work, the better off they will be. We give young parents a financial incentive for splitting up.
This is not a compassionate system, nor is it a helpful system. It is a social catastrophe. And we will not allow it to continue.
That is why I want Us to get very serious, very quickly, about welfare reform. And I hope
the federal government will have the wisdom to do the same by giving states the immediate flexibility we need to change.
Minnesotans want welfare reform. And when I say reform, ata minimum, I mean the following:
· First, any welfare reform proposal that I sign will eliminate, overnight, all welfare for able-bodied adults without kids. They should never have been on welfare in the first place.
· Second, I want to make sure that first time welfare applicants who have children have a very clear understanding of their obligation. And that obligation is to work. We will provide you with assistance in a variety of areas, but there will be no welfare check. We want people in need to succeed and the way to succeed is through employment.
Work is not punishment. Millions of Minnesotans go to work everyday in factories and offices and restaurants and warehouses - and they do it to pay their bills. Why should people on public assistance be taken off the hook?
· Third, I want us to expand a successful experiment we launched last year in seven counties called the Minnesota Family Investment Program. Participants in this program can work, yet still receive some assistance for a period of time. The program tries to serve as a sturdy, one-way bridge out of welfare, and preliminary numbers show that it is working.
· Fourth, we can require teenage parents to live with their own parents as a condition of receiving assistance. We want family members to come together in times of need.
· And finally, we can continue our growing commitment to child support enforcement. In fact, at the end of this month, we will be publishing in local newspapers the names of the 100 parents who owe the most in unpaid child support. It's sad that we must go to this extreme to hold some people responsible for the well-being of their own children.
These are the ingredients of a bill we will sign.' The people of Minnesota have said they want welfare reform. And they expect a proposal from the legislature that is not cluttered with controversial amendments. Every idea has the right to stand or fall on its own merit. And by the way, these are the legislature's rules.
I want us to give people a ticket out of welfare and instill the spirit of success in every child.
Our focus must be to make absolutely certain that every child has the opportunity to succeed and win in the world economy - first through a world-class education system and secondly, through the creation of good, high-paying jobs.


We owe it to our children to reorganize our services for children. Once and for all, we want a Department of Children and Education Services to serve the needs of young people from birth to career.. Working together, we can make this a reality.
We envision a department that focuses on nurturing and challenging every child to success.
We now have more than 250 different children's programs scattered throughout 15 different state agencies. Let's take all those resources and roll them into one state department - eliminating the duplication, fragmentation and turf battles.
Through the use of block grants, the new department will be a resource, not a regulator, in helping local schools and communities solve problems.
I see a department that will assist local communities in working to meet the challenging graduation standards that will be implemented next year. Minnesota employers expect our students to meet higher expectations than in the past and every single Minnesotan wants our children to meet those expectations. They can, they will.and they must.
We now know that within five years, 70 percent of the available jobs in America will not require a four-year degree, but they will require specific job training. That is why the new department will be involved in bringing employers to the center of education reform. Every teacher and every school should make it their business to learn the needs of Minnesota employers.
We will foster the creation of local partnerships between schools and employers and expand the youth apprenticeship concept throughout the state. We want to direct our resources toward those things that will give more kids the opportunity to graduate from high school with the hope of securing a decent job. This will be a difficult budget year, but youth apprenticeship· MUST be a priority.
In the area of higher education, every institution should see itself as an integral part of Minnesota's economic engine - preparing people for the world of work. H we truly care about our young people, we will measure the success of higher education by the number of graduates who are placed in good, high-wage jobs - and we will invest in those positive results.

And finally, let's not forget, when our children do begin to look for work, they need a reason to stay in Minnesota. Those jobs will not come here by accident. The fact is we have a solid economy with one of the lowest unemployment rates in America. And while the median income is dropping nationally, it is increasing in Minnesota. While poverty is increasing in America, it is dropping in Minnesota.
But we also know that we have a huge wall that is a barrier to future success. And that wall is created by an uncompetitive workers' compensation system and a continued expectation of tax increases.
Rest assured that wall will come down.
I want Minnesota to enact meaningful reform that addresses the major cost-drivers in the system. Let's vow not to lose one more employer to high workers' compensation costs.
And let's vow today that we will work to bring Minnesota out of the top ten states in taxes. That's why I am pledging no new general taxes through 1998.
If we can reform workers' compensation and lose our reputation as a high tax state, Minnesota has the potential to become an economic powerhouse in the 21st century. And we must settle for nothing less.
Underlying all of this is the reality that no state can succeed if it does not have an overall sense of security and optimism. And that cannot happen if people live in fear of violence. Minnesotans want to be able to walk the streets and feel safe, and they want to know that their family members are secure. We all share this goal, and we can achieve this goal together.
Let me share with you what the people of Brooklyn Park have done. For years, they watched as their community began to deteriorate, their crime rate marched upward and long time residents began to move out.
In the fall of 1993, they decided to act. Through an initiative called "Come Home to The Park" involving thousands of volunteers they have brought pride and growth back to their city. Apartment owners and property owners have cleaned up and fixed up their buildings. With the help of 160 new neighborhood watch programs and a very active business community, the serious crime rate dropped 20 percent last year.

Everyone feels good about Brooklyn Park again. Police Chief Don Davis, and former mayor, Jesse Ventura are here today and I salute you and all the people of your community. Rest assured, our Department of Public Safety will do everything it can to work with local police and strengthen our commitment to safe neighborhoods. People working together can make their neighborhoods, safe. Let us further understand that no matter how many programs we create, no matter how many prisons we build or how many police officers we put on the street, ultimately the strength of our communities rests in the values that bring us together. We in government have been reluctant to discuss values for fear of political labeling. But the truth is, this nation was formed by those who were committed to values. We want our children to grow up believing in honesty, hard work, discipline, mutual respect and a commitment to family and community. Each of us has an obligation to make certain that our children embody those values. Now the people have spoken. This is their hour. But you and I, as elected officials, should cast aside our political differences and work together on their will. For there is no more noble mission than one in which we walk hand-in-hand toward a future that once again ranks Minnesota as the finest place to live in the world.My fellow Minnesotans.
Much has been made about the selection of this location and this audience for the state of the state address. Some have questioned the decision to move the speech outside of the traditional Capitol chambers. Some have questioned the decision to speak to an unconventional audience, full of entrepreneurs and job creators from across Minnesota.
Well, I must admit: the critics are on to something. We picked this place and this audience precisely because our times demand that we break old conventions, alter old habits, and revise old ways of doing business.
We want change, reform, and growth for Minnesota, and I salute you for helping to lead the way. More broadly, it is Minnesotans themselves -- both in and out of this room -- who are demanding change, reform, and growth. It is now the task of those of us in government to respond and to deliver.
Join me, and together, we will.
We are trying something else new tonight. We are using technology -- video, computer graphics, photos, and other visual images -- to highlight this address. We do this not only to benefit the audience, but to illustrate our commitment to change, to emphasize the need to embrace the future, to think and act anew.
with that said, I suggest there is no better way to begin than to listen to what our fellow Minnesotans think of the state of the state, and to tell us, in their own words, how we can improve it.
As you can see, Minnesotans welcome change. In fact, they demand it. And they know what I know: that when Minnesotans unite, and work together towards a goal, there is little we cannot achieve.
I know this because five times I've come before the Legislature in a state of the state address and five times we have accomplished big things together. We have built a record of reform and results of which we can all be proud.
Take our biggest challenge, fiscal reform. When I first spoke to you as Governor, the state faced a $1.8 billion budget deficit. Our state spending was growing 15 percent faster than inflation and outpacing personal income. The state's bond rating had slipped and our financial house was in complete disarray.
Five years later, look what we have accomplished. We now have a $824 million surplus, not a deficit. We have stood firm against increases in taxes and have even cut some. Minnesota is now ranked among the top four states in financial management and we have reclaimed our AAA bond rating. Thanks to the Price of Government Resolution passed last year, we are actually on course to reduce the state's claim on personal income from 18.4 to 17.7 percent over the next five years.

The big spenders said it would never be done, but we held firm, and we all won.

Take health care reform. Three years ago, 95,000 Minnesotans

including 4,100 families could not afford private health

insurance. Today I thanks to MinnesotaCare I we are helping these

families get the quality care they need; care that keeps babies

and pregnant mothers healthy; care that keeps children well, in

school, and ready for success.


The critics said it could not be done, but we insisted it could, and we all won.

Take welfare reform. Just last spring, I signed a landmark bill that rewards work, helps families stay together, and eliminates welfare altogether for employable adults without children. Overnight, we have begun to transform the cycle of welfare dependency and despair into an action plan for work, opportunity, and hope. What is more, the twin reforms of health care and welfare are actually helping the'state to save money: some $200 million last year alone.

The status quo said it should not be done, but we demanded change, and we all won.

Take workers' compensation reform. The cost of Minnesota's workers' compensation system hit $1.2 billion in 1993, an all-time high. Prior to the reforms passed last year, Minnesota's rates averaged 25 percent more than neighboring states, driving businesses out of the state, despite a better safety record. Thanks to our joint efforts, the bill I signed cuts premiums up to 25 percent. It rewards employers for safe workplaces, reduces lawsuits, and helps those most in need.

The nay-sayers said it must not be done, but we did it, and we all won.

In the end, however, our success is not measured by the volume of our legislative work or by the number of decisions made at the state Capitol. What matters is that Minnesotans are enjoying wider economic and social success.

Personal income is up. From 1990 to 1994, income per person in Minnesota grew 18.5 percent, outpacing the national average. Our ranking among the states in personal income moved up from 19th to 16th.

Job creation is up. Minnesota grew 240,000 new non-agricultural jobs between 1991-95, a pace nearly twice the national average. Unemployment is down. Minnesota's jobless rate in November was just 2.8 percent, less than half the national average.

Our economy is the strongest in the Midwest. In a state-by-state comparison, the Corporation for Enterprise Development ranked Minnesota as having the nation's fifth best job market and the region's best overall economic performance. They also ranked us as enjoying the highest quality of life. Minnesotans worked hard to build this record of success and we are not going to let the spenders, the nay-sayers, or the critics take it away.

These are not just statistics, positive as they are. The real story is that broad economic success allows Minnesotans to pursue their dreams, from owning a home to buying a business. It allows them to provide for their families, to save for their children's education, to plan for their retirement. It means more than money, more than material. It means lives less burdened by worry, lives more full, lives more free.

Despite these successes, problems remain: problems that are testing our faith in the American dream, in our hopes for a better community, state, and nation. Left ignored, they threaten to undue all we have accomplished together.
First, too many of our schools --- especially in Minneapolis and St. Paul --- are failing, and large numbers of our children are failing, too. Over six years, we have increased spending on education 57 percent --- almost ten percent per year --- and yet scores for most students in our core cities are declining.
Consider Minneapolis. According to tests reported by the Minneapolis school district, the percentage of fifth graders who passed basic math dropped 14 points in just five years. The percentage dropped 11 points on the basic writing test and 10 points for reading. These are the results despite the fact that per pupil funding in Minneapolis has risen to $9,200, almost 50 percent more than the average school district.
Consider St. Paul. The four year drop out rate for grades 9-12 is more than 50 percent, according to St. Paul's own statistics. For native American children, the rate climbs to 78 percent, for African Americans it hits 67 percent, for Hispanics, 65 percent. My friends, this is nothing short of wholesale crisis.
Minnesota simply cannot compete and win in the global economy if we accept such widespread failure as "good enough." Nor can Minnesota afford the social costs of more street crime, massive expansions in our welfare rolls, and more stress on our already over-burdened justice system.
We cannot afford dawdling and delay, we must move to reform education now. Join me, and together, we will.
Second, despite tougher sentences, crime is up, and people feel less safe. Last year, we saw an unprecedented explosion of violence in Minneapolis. A city once known nationally for its exceptional quality of life and as a vibrant business and cultural center now generates stories about its soaring murder rate --- 97 last year.
Violence has also become more random. Innocents and bystanders are being killed, creating tragedy for their families and raising fears for all.
The costs of responding to this social breakdown are also spiraling out of control. Violent crime among juveniles has climbed 260 percent, thereby driving up incarceration rates. If we continue at this pace, Minnesota will be forced to build a prison every two years, at a cost of $100 million each.
We must change this course. Join me, and together, we will.
Third, Minnesotans feel anxious about job security, and sense that their quality of life is threatened. Major corporations are downsizing, laying off hundreds, sometimes thousands of employees. High-pay, high-benefit middle management jobs are being slated for extinction, as companies rush to stay competitive in the global marketplace.
Many middle class families are finding it difficult to get ahead, with the big bite of taxes and the press of monthly bills. Even many double-income households are one paycheck away from debt, one downturn away from the unemployment line.
These are the realities and complexities of life in the middle 1990s. Times have changed, and we must change with them. Join, me, and together we will.
The old ways will not work. We cannot tax are way out of these problems; more taxes will only reduce, not increase, our social


and economic well-being. We cannot spend our way out of these problems. The state and local governments already face future budget shortfalls of $8 billion by 2001. We cannot look to Washington, D.C., for salvation Ñ thanks to reformers there, the federal government is finally attempting to live within its means. But that means less for Minnesota.
One thing is clear: past approaches are outdated, ineffective, or unaffordable. We need bold approaches, fresh thinking, and new ways of doing business.
The comprehensive report, prepared at my request by former Congressman Vin Weber and former state Senator John Brandl recommending ways to solve our upcoming budget gaps, highlights this fresh thinking. I urge the state Legislature and all Minnesotans to give their proposals serious consideration, because this Administration certainly will.
But I also want to offer my strategy for managing the new realities, my plan for meeting Minnesota's challenges.
Three years remain in my term and what I outline now is my three year plan. Before I get to other specifics, however', I suggest we focus first on rebuilding our confidence in lawmakers and democratic institutions. That confidence has been shaken lately by Phonegate, by criminal probes of legislators, by headline stories of unethical conduct.
Let us face it: public officials have a credibility gap. To be credible reformers, we must first fix our own system. For too long, it has been too open to abuse of power, too prone to excessive influence by special interests, too removed from the will and aspirations of the people.
I propose comprehensive legislative reform. I do not refer to tweaking around the edges. I mean full scale change that lets the public know we mean business.
This session, I will offer a package that will restrict per diem only to days the Legislature is actually in session. Taxpayers should not be asked to pick up the tab unless the people's business is being done.
We must end certain conflicts of interest, like requiring a member to excuse himself or herself from voting on matters relating directly to their occupation. We must require the state auditor to audit the Legislature. In the past, the Legislature has tried to audit itself, an arrangement that lacked proper distance and oversight.
We must apply all laws to the Legislature itself. Inexcusably, the Legislature has excused itself from affirmative action and pay-equity laws, strict civil service code and collective bargaining agreements, and a variety of other special arrangements.
The Legislature should live by a simple rule: if a law is good enough for the people of Minnesota, it is good enough for legislators.
We must create a unicameral Legislature. Minnesota has the fifth largest Legislature in the nation and the cost of maintaining it is enormous. In 1972, it cost $8.5 million. In 1992, it cost $77 million. Let us pass a constitutional amendment for a one-house legislature.
We must provide for initiative and referendum. The state Capitol is not the repository for all wisdom. Let us give the people the chance to express their will on the ballot.
And I want term limits. Term limits will inject new blood, new vitality into a system too often controlled by the vested, and the entrenched. No politician is so valuable he can't be furloughed.
These reforms will restore trust and confidence in our system. Before I leave office, I will insist that comprehensive legislative reform becomes law.
One area where we have already built public trust is in fiscal management. We have done so because we held firm to our conviction that good financial planning -- living within our means -- is a necessary first step to good government. Our efforts have paid off with a $824 million surplus.
I know there will be a rush to spend this money a hundred different ways. Some legislators remind me of a teenager with a new credit card: they never met a spending limit they could not exceed.
But I tell you: this is not the politician's money, it is the taxpayer's money. Minnesotans worked hard to provide it. And as long as I am Governor, we will respect their labors and we will not squander their hard-won surplus.
We will not propose dramatic new spending, but we will request targeted investments, targeted tax relief, and wise planning for the future.
Out of the $824 million, some $200 million comes about due to savings as a result of health and welfare reform, we will spend just $160 million on our top priorities. Those priorities include crime enforcement and prevention, youth jobs and intervention, and education technology and reform.
We will target $24 million to tax relief, $100 million over four years. These tax cuts will help retain and create jobs in Minnesota and will help parents provide advanced education for their children.
All the rest --- nearly two-thirds of a billion dollars --- we will save.
The first $140 million will go to the budget reserve we created last year to help us prepare for federal cutbacks, an economic downturn, and future shortfalls. The balance --- some $500 million --- will be saved.
But make no mistake: we will not surrender it up to the spenders. During my time in office, I have built something of a reputation for using the veto pen. If the spenders in the Legislature attempt to fritter away this surplus, I am going to relish the chance of adding to that reputation.
Within this framework, then, we will make targeted investments. The first must be to protect public safety because that is the first role of government. Nothing else can succeed --- not job growth, not social bonds --- unless we first are physically secure.
By public safety I do not mean safe only in certain areas, only at certain times, only if you are a certain sex, and only if you are a certain color.
I mean safe anytime, anywhere, no matter who you are, allover Minnesota.
We offer a two-track approach. The first is improved enforcement. Minnesota already has enough laws, tough sentences, and strong penalties in place. Our task now is to confront the gangs, the thugs, and the criminals directly on the streets.
Police Chief Wade Setter in Brooklyn Park provides a model for what works. This 17-year veteran supervises a force of 68 officers who patrol the streets and neighborhoods of that city. In the past five years, homicide, assault, burglary, larceny, and auto theft have all declined, thanks to neighborhood watch groups, citizen involvement, and community policing they helped organize.

I propose the "Safe Streets Initiative" to build on this success. Through this program, we will hire police on overtime to conduct neighborhood sweeps. During these sweeps, officers will strictly enforce all laws, including curfew, truancy, and traffic laws. police will develop street contacts, check for outstanding warrants, and generate intelligence on suspected criminals. The objective is simple: arrest all violators.

The sweeps will also be conducted across jurisdictions, using many law enforcement agencies. For example, the Hennepin and Ramsey County Sheriff's Departments will work with Minneapolis and St. Paul. Bloomington will work with Brooklyn Park, and Burnsville will work with Maplewood.

To the thugs who would prey on our citizens we say this: get out of Minnesota now, or you will pay the price. Stay, and you will do time.

We will build the effectiveness of law enforcement agencies by upgrading their communications systems. We will also insist on building up a full staff complement for the State Patrol. I will ask for 46 additional troopers to keep our motorists safe.

We will do more to strengthen community policing, to help citizens form block clubs and crime watch groups, and to build closer ties between law enforcement and the people they protect.

Through partnerships and teamwork, we can and we will take back our streets, our schools, our homes, and our neighborhoods.

Crime control also requires prevention. We must do more to give
our youth positive alternatives to life on the streets. We can start by investing directly in community programs that work, rather than in more government bureaucracies that don't. We want
to empower existing community organizations like YMCA's, neighborhood recreation centers, and church groups that reach out to at~risk juveniles.

A good example is the St. Paul Children's Youth Initiative,

supervised by Kathleen Vellenga. They run a program called the

Dad's Group, which helps men become more effective, more

responsive fathers. Given the high rates of teenage pregnancy

and single-parent families in the inner city, nothing could be

more important than strengthening fatherhood.


I also believe that the best anti-crime remedy ever invented is

something called a job. Work not only pays the bills. It builds

self-respect. It fosters personal responsibility. It strengthens

community.



That is why I propose to provide $6 million for summer jobs that will reach 5,000 at-risk youth. The need for this program is especially acute now, given federal cutbacks in this area. Let us agree to give these children a shot at success by giving them a shot at a job.

I also want schools to become full partners in crime prevention.
That is why I will call for $20 million to finance new construction or remodeling of schools and community centers that offer after-school enrichment programs. I will also propose $5 million in grants to three neighborhoods in St. Paul, and three in Minneapolis, that establish after-school enrichment programs. We will target those areas with especially high rates of poverty, teen pregnancy, and juvenile crime.

Some may not like these investments. But consider the alternative. In addition to social costs, criminal justice is the fastest growing part of the budget, up 25 percent in just two years. Left unchecked, these trends will soon crowd out spending in areas like education and health care. We must move now to change our course.

From the beginning, we have been committed to strengthening the twin pillars of job growth and quality of life because they define who we are as people, and as a state. In a competitive global economy, we dare not take them for granted. We must pursue an aggressive strategy that improves both.

I offer two examples from our bonding bill which illustrate what I mean by a commitment to quality of life. The first is our request to fund a new $34 million Science Museum of Minnesota on the riverfront in St. Paul.

The Science Museum is nothing short of a state-wide treasure. Its exhibits, displays, and films help minds, young and old, to understand and appreciate their world. And as a hub for St. Paul's riverfront redevelopment project, a new science museum
will do more than inform and enrich. It will serve as a draw for the entire area, bringing world-wide tourists and economic vitality with it. The Science Museum models how interdependent quality of life and economic success are.

We will also invest in Minnesota's natural resources and our citizen's love of the outdoors. Our entire environmental package will top $65 million next year, $174 million over six years. But one program exemplifies our commitment.

The Reinvest in Minnesota program --- RIM is now ten years old and yet has never been fully funded. RIM helps retire marginal land for the benefit of water, soil, fish, and wildlife. Fully 1.4 million Minnesotans bought hunting or fishing licenses last year, pouring $1.5 billion into our economy to pursue their pastimes. They, and we, want to conserve our natural resources for our children and grandchildren. That is why I am proud to fund RIM at $12 million on its 10th Anniversary and I ask the Legislature to approve it.

We also must have a strategic approach to job creation. We propose to advance the sales tax exemption on capital equipment, bringing the rate down to zero by January, 1998. We do this because equipment-intensive sectors, including forest products, printing, and value-added agriculture are among the biggest, and most productive, in Minnesota. Cutting this tax means jobs, pure and simple.

We also propose targeted tax relief to entrepreneurs who invest in our core cities, bringing employment and opportunity with them. We want areas that had been red lined by businesses to become red hot with the energy and vitality of new jobs.

We will push for development of new products in agriculture and related industries, which provide one in nearly four jobs in Minnesota. We are especially excited by the possibilities of value-added products, which are turning soybeans into building materials; corn into fuel; and in the future, alfalfa into electricity.

But perhaps our most exciting proposal is in the field of medical
technology, a $2 billion industry in this state. Minnesota is home to 500 medical product companies employing 16,000 people, ranking us second in the nation. Our medical expertise at the University of Minnesota and the Mayo clinic has built a national and international reputation.

The best is exemplified by Dr. Frank Cerra, Dean of the Medical School, and Dr. Wei-Shou, inventors of an artificial liver. The product they developed is called the Regenerex machine, which will help support the livers of patients until they can receive a



liver transplant. They now need funding in order to seek FDA approval.
There are other obstacles. For example, researchers at the University are working on 21st century problems in labs developed 50 years ago, using equipment that in some cases dates back 20 years. Unless we act now, Minnesota could lose hundreds, even thousands of jobs to high-tech states like California·.
Our plan is to make the University of Minnesota a medical technology resource center second to none and to create a seamless "medical alley" to Rochester Mayo. That is why I am asking for $6.5 million to upgrade the university's medical research facilities. We have an urgent need for more lab space with the latest equipment.
We want to make sure that when bright ideas are developed, they get turned into marketable products. This is called "technology transfer," a service provided by a state funded organization known as Minnesota Technology. Minnesota Technology does a good job; we want them to do even better, which is why they are working closely with our Department of Trade and Economic Development to make sure that Minnesota's brightest minds get connected to Minnesota's best entrepreneurs.
That's how Minnesota gave birth to Medtronic, which now employs 5,000 in Minnesota and generates $2 billion in business a year. Win Wallen, the company's Chairman of the Board, put it succinctly: "without the University of Minnesota, Medtronic never would have located here." We want the Medtronics of the future to say the same thing: we will grow in Minnesota.
We cannot prevent or reduce crime, grow jobs, or create long-term economic and social opportunity unless we first reform our education system. To do that, we must be honest about its problems.
Before I address those, let me first say that I know many parents strongly support their public schools and are pleased with the quality of their children's education. They are right to be proud. Public schools in Edina, Fergus Falls, Willmar, Burnsville, Kenyon-Wanamingo and hundreds of other communities in Minnesota work and work well. I salute the parents, teachers, administrators and school boards in them all.
But those successes cannot blind us to our failures. While it is true our college bound students are doing pretty well, our non-college bound students are falling further behind. For example, just 10 of 53 elementary schools in Minneapolis scored at or above the national average on the California Achievement Test.
Employers are the first to pick up on this low achievement. A majority of employers in Minneapolis and St. Paul report that over half of today's job applicants lack basic skills in math, reading and writing.
Those who embrace the status quo are quick to quibble over statistics. But I ask you: how many ways must we count failure --- how many more children must we lose --- before we admit the problem and begin providing solutions?
I say this: the time for delay is over. The time for leadership is now and I intend to provide it.
We have a mUlti-front strategy aimed at freeing up teachers, schools, parents, and children and giving them the tools they need to succeed.
First, we want to give teachers more freedom: freedom to receive rewards for outstanding work in the classroom in the form of merit pay. Teaching is a noble profession. Few roles in society are more important than that of educator and mentor. We entrust our very future to those who would excite and expand young minds.
Merit pay rewards excellence. Merit pay spurs performance. We want our good teachers to be well compensated and for school districts to have incentives to recruit and retain them. We will seek merit pay for teachers.
We want to loosen teacher tenure. Too often, tenure locks in mediocrity and locks out our finest young teachers. Is it not an injustice against children when three Teachers of the Year in the past 15 years are not rehired because of tenure? We must put a premium on excellence, not seniority. We will seek changes in tenure.
We also want binding arbitration. We support the right of teachers to bargain collectively. But when both sides negotiate in good faith, should we not resolve the dispute through an honest broker, a neutral third party? Must we hold six, seven, and eight year-old children hostage to a labor dispute? We will seek binding arbitration.
I spoke of freeing up teachers. We also must free up schools. We will say to schools: tell us the mandates that are blocking your path to excellence and we will remove them. We are not in the procedure business. We are not in the inputs business. We are in the results business. If a mandate is an obstacle to achievement, we will not balk. It will be waived.
We will also invest in technology. I propose $22 million for hardware, software, and communications technology for Minnesota's public schools. Some of that money will expand fiber optic lines, some will purchase computers, some will buy programming. We want a student in Blackduck to learn French via the Internet while the student in Eagan writes a term paper using the Library of Congress. We want to equip our children with the computer literacy skills they will need to excel in the workplace of the future.
We will also get business involved. We will expand our program to refurbish computers donated by the private sector, a program which also builds partnerships and relationships schools need to succeed. Our goal is to put Minnesota schools in the top five in technology.
Most importantly, we must free up parents. The best school districts already are responsive to parents, already seek out and value their views. But we must do more to empower parents, to put them in charge of their children's educational destiny.
One way is to offer parents an education IRA, a program we call Edvest. We propose to allow parents to create a special tax free savings account for higher education and to exempt the."first $4000 they deposit into it each year. The private sector and non-profit organizations will also be encouraged to donate matching funds.
My friends, this is a tax cut for families working to educate their children and I say it's about time.
This program embodies our belief that, given the proper tools, parents will invest in their children's future. We trust parents more than institutions to make the best decisions on behalf of their children and to take responsibility for the results.
This is why we embrace parental choice. We want to give children from moderate and low-income families the same opportunities the affluent already enjoy. Our plan builds on open enrollment, which Minnesota passed in 1987 amid many of the same objections we are hearing now. We want to expand the range of choices to include private and parochial schools. Our choice pilot program includes Minneapolis, St. Paul, Brooklyn Center and one outstate school district.
with choice, we not only get more freedom, we get more competition. And we want to promote competition between schools. The truth is that competition spurs excellence. Competition keeps the focus on outcomes. Just as Detroit auto companies were forced to innovate, change, and improve thanks to foreign competition in the 1970s and 1980s, schools will improve thanks to school choice.
Let us not allow a whole generation of Minnesota children to slip away. Let us not allow the forces of inertia and the status quo to keep us from doing what is right.
I pledge today: Minnesota parents will have school choice.
with the 1996 legislative session now underway, I hear many things. Some say we should do little this year and next. Maybe just fine tune the budget, embrace the status quo, coast, simply manage the ride. But that is not why we are here. And that defensive posture escalates the social price.
It means even lower public trust in democratic institutions. It means chronic budget cuts or chronic tax increases. It means accepting failure in many inner city public schools. It means escalating crime rates and violence. It means a new 600-bed prison every two years. It means losing ground to global competition, the steady erosion of high-paying jobs and Minnesota's quality of life.
My friends, it is irresistible: Change will overwhelm the status quo. The only question is whether we make change our enemy or our ally.
Simply put, we have an exciting journey ahead. It represents an opportunity for all of us to more closely define and protect the one ingredient that brings us all together and that is our love for the quality of life in Minnesota. The fact is, whether you live in Warroad or Caledonia or Worthington or Duluth, we like life in Minnesota. We expect government to prevent harm and to enhance success.
Tonight I outlined in the State of the State new job creation opportunities that will allow us to continue to out-pace national growth, new partnerships that link our great Universities with the Mayo Clinic and the private sector, unprecedented access to computers for all of our children, and a prevention program that is second to none. These are not concerns that are either Republican or Democrat and they cannot be defined or measured according to the normal political slide rule. The fact is, we recognize change and we want to harness that change for the betterment of all people.
I want all of us to cast aside that which divides and begin moving in the direction that defines a better Minnesota, a safer Minnesota, a more opportunistic Minnesota and a winning Minnesota.
The truth is my friends, this is a marvelous state and you and I are going to work together to make it even better. We want to make absolutely certain that we give to our children no less than what our parents gave to us. And we want their children to have the same shot at happiness and success.
We remain committed to that agenda, to that goal, to that dream.Thank you. Speaker Carruthers, President Spear, fellow constitutional officers, members of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeals, former Governors, members ofthe Minnesota Legislature, friends and Minnesotans.
It is with great pleasure that Lt. Governor Joanne Benson and I come to share with you, the people of Minnesota, our optimism for Minnesota's future. Today, I will share my goals for this upcoming session, my thoughts on the last six years and my vision for where we are headed.
As you know, this will be my last major State of the State address. I want you to know what a pleasure it has been to work with this distinguished body over the past six years and what an honor and privilege it is to serve as Governor of this wonderful state. I want to thank the many people in this room and throughout Minnesota who have worked with me.
It has been my pleasure to work with the legislative leaders of both parties: Senate Majority Leader Roger Moe; Senate Minority Leader Dean Johnson; House Minority Leader Steve Sviggum and former House Speaker Irv Anderson. And I look forward to a good working relationship with our new House Speaker, Phil Carruthers. Congratulations on your election, Speaker Carruthers.
I must admit, it has not always been easy being a governor from one party and working with a Legislature of the other party. Often we have been at odds over issues. Yet, in the end, we have formed coalitions and alliances and set aside partisan politics for the well-being of the state.
One thing I have discovered as Governor, is the incredible spirit of community in our state. I have seen it in the willingness of Minnesotans to roll up our sleeves and work together to preserve and enhance the future of our children, the beauty of our surroundings, and the economic vitality of our cities, neighborhoods, towns and countryside.
And, when confronted with a crisis, we go out of our way to help. Whether it is our farmers during the crisis of the 1980s, the floods of the 1990s, or the blizzards of this winter, Minnesota does pull together.
And by working together, I would argue that we in Minnesota have accomplished more significant reform over the last six years than any state in America.


Financial management

At my first State of the State Address, I spoke about how Minnesota was in financial crisis. State spending exceeded revenue by $800,000 per day. Our budget was $1.8 billion in the red. Clearly, our financial house was not in order.

Since those early days, our administration has focused on long-term financial planning:

· We wanted adequate budget savings in case of a recession.

· We wanted to keep government spending below the rise in personal income.

· We wanted to avoid spending commitments that could not be kept.

· Controlling the growth in state spending led to 181 vetoes which prevented more than $1.5 billion in new taxes, spending, and fees. I want to again thank the minority leaders who helped sustain these vetoes -- Steve Sviggum, Dean Johnson, and former minority leader Terry Dempsey who is with us today.

Without these vetoes, today we would not be discussing a $1.4 billion surplus.

Today:

· We have instilled a culture of responsible spending.

· We have regained our AAA bond rating from two of three credit agencies.

· Minnesota is ranked among the top five states in financial management and I say one of the two best in America.

· We have cut taxes by $356 million. And I am proud to say that we will be proposing a tax cut that will return $500 million to Minnesota taxpayers.

On top of that good news, for the first time in decades, our budget will have a long-term structural balance through the year 2002. And we met this week with Standard & Poors about restoring the final AAA bond rating.

Health Care/Welfare

In 1992, this Legislature, working on a bipartisan basis, adopted a comprehensive strategy to improve health care for all Minnesotans. This package of reforms, now called MinnesotaCare, is a national model for health care reform.

· Today, 95,000 low- and moderate-income Minnesotans who previously had no health insurance now have coverage under MinnesotaCare.

· 35,000 families and 52,000 children now have coverage. The percentage of uninsured Minnesota children has been slashed by 43 percent.

· With our expansion of the MinnesotaCare program last year, an additional 45,000 individuals will be covered by 1999.

In combination with our successful welfare reform plan, we have given families enough help to make the jump from welfare to work. This means many more children are being raised in families where work is a way of life.
· Today, 4,000 fewer Minnesota families are relying on w~lfare benefits.

· We have cut state spending for welfare by more than 21 percent.

· Together, reforms in health care and welfare have saved our taxpayers more than $200 million.

· The foundation of our welfare reform philosophy is work. And the key to putting people to work is creating jobs.

Look at the jobs area:

· We have created 313,000 new jobs.

· With an unemployment rate at nearly half the national average, we are creating jobs 65 percent faster than the rest of the nation.

· And while manufacturing job growth has declined nationally, Minnesota is seeing modest growth, especially in Central Minnesota.

Our business climate today is more conducive to expansion and growth thanks to comprehensive workers' compensation reform.

· We have saved Minnesota employers $121 million, an overall 35 percent cut in premiums.

· Our system encourages workers to return to their jobs and discourages litigation.

Environment

As Minnesotans, we treasure and enjoy our environment like no other state in America. Where else but

Minnesota can you enjoy the breathtaking beauty and year-round recreation offered by our lakes, rivers, parks and trails.

And as an administration, our commitment to the environment includes:

· Adoption of the nation's toughest wetlands law which protects this vital resource and provides local governments the authority to develop their own management plans.

· An unprecedented commitment to clean up the Minnesota River so it can once again be a recreational resource for our families.

· A sustainable development initiative that serves as a national model for how to merge the needs of business with the demands of our environment.

· And a partnership with business that produces better environmental results. Because the best way to get results is to work together.

Children's Issues

Finally, in the area of improving the well-being of children, Minnesota's accomplishments rank second to none. From the beginning, children have been a top priority of this administration. Our commitment has been emphasized with funding increases for children's programs that surpass any time in Minnesota history.

Over the past six years:

· We have taken bold steps to streamline services for children and families starting with the creation of the Department of Children, Families and Learning.

· Today there is a single children's agenda for the state of Minnesota -- something that has never existed before -- integrating all educational and social programs for kids and families.

· We have created incentives for communities to work together for the well-being of children.

· Today, 57 family service collaboratives bring community schools, community organizations and health professionals and social service workers together to share resources and ideas.

· And the results are impressive. In Blue Earth County alone we have seen a $296,000 savings in out-of-home placements and an increase in parent involvement in schools. Not only does this save money, but more importantly, it saves children.
In all of these areas, I can confidently report that we in Minnesota have accomplished more reform in the last six years than in any other state in America. Now, we must turn our attention to the challenges that lie ahead.


This afternoon, I would like to talk about community -- our community. As a whole, Minnesota is one community. We are proud of this community -- it gives us identity and defines our heritage. No matter where we live -- whether in Warroad or Worthington, Moorhead or Minneapolis, Togo or Tonka Bay-we are still one community.
As legislators, you bear the title of state senator or state representative. Your job is to balance the needs of your local districts with the needs of the state community as a whole. And, I know how difficult that can be at times.
On the opening day of this legislative session, I was struck by the words of Senator Roger Moe. "We are one state, we are one family," he said. He reminded us that we have a tendency to divide ourselves -- to pit rural Minnesota against the metro area, north against south, cities against suburbs.
Senator Moe, I want you to know, I fully agree with you. And as we look toward the future, I pray that we will continue to work as one community.
And two areas where I hope we can agree are the need for property tax reform and pay raises for our state agency commissioners.
· Yes, I believe that commercial/industrial property taxes are too high -- number one in several categories. We must be honest if we plan on addressing property tax reform. High taxes affect our ability to grow jobs.
· That is why I have asked Revenue Commissioner Jim Girard to work with a bipartisan legislative group to address real property tax reform. We want to grow jobs in Minnesota.
· And it's time that the commissioners of our state agencies receive a pay increase. These people have not had a pay raise in more than 10 years. So I am asking you to pass a bill allowing pay raises for the commissioners, and I support increasing the pay of legislators and the judiciary, too.
Crime/Corrections
But let me be clear on community. A strong community cannot succeed if it cannot protect its own. The good news today is that Minnesotans feel safer in their community than they did three years ago. And overall crime rates have declined across America and in Minnesota.
Since 1991, my administration has made fighting crime a top priority. We have:
· Increased funding for courts and judges.
· Introduced strategies such as police street sweeps and community policing.
· Strengthened penalties for drive-by shootings, sex crimes and stalking.
· And made Minnesota among the toughest states in America for violent repeat offenders and crimes committed with a gun.
Crime statistics show that these efforts have made a difference. However, as overall crime has decreased, the number of violent juvenile offenders has increased dramatically. And certain inner city areas of Minnesota are literally under siege.
Statistics show that most juvenile offenders begin with small infractions and progress to more serious crimes, often because they suffer no consequences. To reverse this trend, we must target the first-time offender and send a message that no misbehavior will be tolerated. Let me make this clear -- the first-time offender cannot become a second-time offender.
· Through a partnership with the Minnesota National Guard, we will establish work camps at Camp Ripley where first-time juvenile offenders will clear brush, maintain roads and clean up facilities. I want kids working hard and learning to do something constructive as a team.
· Repeat or violent juvenile offenders will undergo more intense supervision and job training to give them the skills to succeed when they return home.
· The focus is on discipline.
Our crime plan also cracks down on high crime neighborhoods and gangs who prey on our community by peddling drugs and violence to our children. We will increase the visibility and presence of police through street sweeps and strict enforcement of all laws.
The success of this aggressive strategy, called Broken Windows, can be seen in New York City. In the last three years, this crime fighting strategy has led to a 39 percent drop in major crime. And the murder rate is at its lowest since 1968. I want the same dramatic results we have seen in New York City to be the reality here.
To keep kids from entering a life of crime, we will expand our aggressive prevention agenda by investing in effective, community-oriented programs which give our young people an alternative to life on the streets. We will target neighborhoods with especially high rates of poverty, teen pregnancy and juvenile crime. We want to keep our young people out of trouble.


We will also increase our focus on children and families with more targeted investments in programs which make a difference in the lives of our working families.
· We will increase funding for programs that help children even before they start school through programs such as Head Start, Early Childhood Family Education and Learning Readiness.
· We are proposing the biggest increase in child care dollars in state history to help welfare families move off government dependence and into the workforce.
· And we will increase support for families who work, particularly those families who are teetering on the edge of self-sufficiency but need a helping hand to pull it all together.
Welfare
Through our ground breaking welfare reform plan and increased aid to working families, we want to break the cycle of poverty. Children deserve the chance to grow up in families where there is work, structure and hope.
· With new strict time limits and work requirements, we will continue to target those individuals who lack the necessary job experience or education that can make them self-sufficient. We will help them become more self-sufficient.

Our administration is committed to working with businesses, big and small, to help provide these individuals withjobs. However, government's responsibility should not be to create jobs. Rather, government must create a climate in which grows quality jobs and produces skilled workers.
Therefore, I urge our businesses who have a shortage of workers to hire these individuals and give them a shot at independence. Both the individual and community will benefit. We will work with you to make this a reality.
Our goal is to make our communities safe and all of our people productive and contributing members.


But a community must also have soul. Our culture, our essence is captured by the arts.
· Our state's 30,000 artists and 1,700 arts organizations generate more than $1 billion each year for our economy.
· We have an active and growing film industry. Film and video production is now a $250 million per year industry that employs over 5,000 people.
But the arts are far more than dollars. The arts give our communities their identity. That is why I am proposing an arts initiative to help nonprofit arts organizations increase their touring activity in Greater Minnesota. Through increased funding we will help communities to create their own arts festivals--to celebrate, to honor creativity and to strengthen their identity.
I want all Minnesotans, no matter where they live, to be able to experience the arts and how they can enhance our communities and unite people from all walks of life. I can see community arts festivals, community theaters springing up -- let the sounds of music vibrate throughout Minnesota. I want Salsburg to talk about the Minnesota music festival.
Stadium
Like the arts, sports give us a strong community identity -- from our youngsters who play T-ball at the neighborhood park, to high school athletics, to our state's professional teams the Vikings, Twins, and Timberwolves. Truly, sports are a part of Minnesota's community.
So are the Minnesota Twins. On this issue, I urge you to look at outcomes. If we do not support the stadium, we will lose the Twins. I do not want our families to lose the opportunity to take their kids to a Twins game.
Yet, critics, say that we should not publicly support a private enterprise whatever the consequence. But, I remind you, community subsidies are part of our public policy. Through tax increment financing, through revenue bonds, and through direct government subsidies and grants.
Take for instance the budget our administration will be releasing next week. It includes $100 million in school aid reimbursements for tax increment financing. Communities throughout the state have committed public resources to help private businesses.
The state has aided other private ventures, too. For example:
· Northwest Airlines. If the state had not stepped in and provided Northwest a loan to keep their operations running, we would now be lamenting the loss of 20,000 direct jobs. An additional 110,000 jobs supported by the airport and $5.5 billion into our economy would have been severely cut back. And many other small and large companies would have looked elsewhere for a more convenient location. Not to mention that the state's pension fund benefitted from the Northwest deal.


We have also supported:
· A new potato plant in Park Rapids.
· A manufacturing company in Benson.
· An ice rink in Roseville.
· An exposition center in Worthington.
· Direct subsidies to political campaigns.
· And by the year 2000, we will have provided nearly $100 million to our state's ethanol industry.
If we as a community are to continue our successes of the past, we must ignore the critics and work together to forge solutions to the challenges we face.
This proposition goes beyond subsidy. For a ten cent tax on cigarettes, we can own 49 percent of the Twins as well as a $350 million outdoor stadium. That is a good investment.
Let me tell you today, I want the Twins to stay in Minnesota. And I will do what I can to bring hockey to St. Paul. Both are part of our communities' quality of life.

A sound community also prepares its young for responsible jobs and toward that end we can all agree on the importance of our higher education system in preparing our students for the challenge of the work place. When it comes to competing for jobs, our state has prospered, largely because of the quality of our workforce.
However, to ensure that our economy continues growth in dynamic, cutting-edge industries, we must form a closer partnership with our entire higher education system:
· It is crucial that we continue to support and strengthen our state colleges and our community and technical colleges in their effort to educate and train Minnesotans for jobs of the future. We to want work closely with Judith Eaton and the presidents of campuses in Bemidji, Mankato, Moorhead, Willmar, Winona, St. Cloud and Southwest State to make our system one of the best in the nation. For instance, students at Northland Technical College in Thief River Falls now each have their own laptop computer thanks to IBM.
· We must provide the University of Minnesota, the state's only research university, with the resources to foster new technologies that can drive our state's economic engine.
· I applaud the University's selection of Mark Yudof and am excited about a close working relationship to help him achieve his goal of making the University of Minnesota a leader in digital technology and one of the top five public institutions in America.
· I am confident that President Yudof will bring a new sense of excitement to the University and will sell that mission and sense of community statewide..
And we will continue our technology transfer initiative to develop more cutting-edge devices with our expertise at the University of Minnesota. By partnering with Academic Health Sciences we can bring ideas from the laboratory to the marketplace. Minnesota has over 500 medical product companies employing 15,000 people, ranking us second in the nation.


Our high school graduates must be prepared to work in a high tech economy.

But the red flags are waving. In a recent study, 42 percent of our employers report that our high school graduates lack necessary skills in reading, writing and math. And with one ofthe nation's tightest labor markets, demand for skilled workers will only increase.

· By the year 2000, 70 percent of all jobs will no longer require a college degree. But, they will require workers to have basic reading and math skills.

· However, our standardized tests tell us that one-third of eighth graders failed basic math and one-fourth failed basic reading.

· And 50 percent of the students in Minneapolis and 8t. Paul drop out.

Well let me tell you, my friends -- no successful community allows its children to fail.

And what is the price of this failure? From funding faulty outcomes through remedial education to the growing cost of our corrections system and welfare rolls, we spend upwards of $2 billion annually on the cost of failure. And this cost will only increase unless we focus on those children who are not making it.

We must do better. Last month I announced a package of reform to make schools accountable to students and families. We want to:

· Establish a statewide test to measure the performance of our students and our schools.

· Drive decision-making to the local level and allow school boards to enter innovative performance contracts to better student achievement.

· Develop charter schools free from government restrictions so they can use creative strategies to tickle the minds of our children.

· Partner with our state universities to put laboratory schools on campuses across Minnesota.

· Establish tax-free savings accounts for families who invest in their children's futures.

· Provide tax credits and deductions to expand choices for parents and students. The money can be used to:

1. hire a math tutor 2. enroll a student in foreign language classes 3. buy a home computer 4. attend a private school or home school a child.

And link every Minnesota school to the Internet and email.

I want Minnesota to be the number one state in computer technology.

For centuries, education has been the heart of the American dream.

To those of you who do not agree with our plan, I say, where is your plan? Do not underestimate my resolve on this issue.

Too many students are failing and we cannot afford to lose one more. I challenge every one of us to put students first.


As we look ahead to the 21st century, I am confident that Minnesota is poised for another exciting journey. It is a journey I pray we will encounter the same success we have seen over the last six years. A journey that will bring us closer together.

We have an incredible opportunity here. An opportunity to direct the needs of education to the child. A chance to make every system understand that our goal is to allow each child to reach his or her potential.

We can make our communities safer and become more committed to helping working families. We will make a commitment to the arts and building our soul within our community.

We can build a new baseball stadium without taxing the general public. We can refurbish the St. Paul Civic Center without taxing the general public.

We want a vibrant, growth-oriented economy which offers opportunity for all. We have taken the state from a deficit to a surplus. And we will cut taxes over $500 million this year.

Minnesota once was a national model. You and I working together are again going to make this the best state in America.Speaker Carruthers, President Spear, Chief Justice Blatz, members of the Supreme Court,

former Chief Justice Sandy Keith, Chief Judge Ed Toussaint, members of the Appellate

Court, former governors, Lieutenant Governor Benson, fellow constitutional officers,

legislators, friends and Minnesotans. And if I were to add all those desiring to run for

Governor, that would encompass the entire chamber.

You have been absolutely marvelous, and I thank you so much for both your kindness and all the courtesies that you have shown me over the past seven years. This past year, for all of us, has been a year of joy and personal sadness. We recently lost one of our most beloved Governors, C. Elmer Anderson of Brainerd, who served his state and his community so well for so long. He will always be a part of our memory and part of our history. We lost Ken Otremba and Barb Vickerman, two truly fine Legislators who exemplified the very best in public service. They, too, will always be a part of who we are. And Tim Bowe, the highly decorated State Trooper and a dear friend, who was truly one of Minnesota's finest. His loss was indeed painful.

On the other hand, we welcome to the Supreme Court our newest member, Jim Gilbert. We are delighted to have you and to also celebrate the elevation of Kathleen Blatz to Chief Justice.

I also want to take a moment to especially thank Sandy Keith for his leadership on the bench. When you look back over his splendid career, and I have admired it from a distance, and the closer I got to know him as Governor, the more I realized what a Minnesota treasure he has really been. He is truly one of Minnesota's greats, and we thank him on behalf of all Minnesotans for his service.

It is expected that the Governor of the State should comment on the state of the state. The truth today is that the state of the state is excellent. Minnesota is sturdy and well-prepared to enter the 21 st century. We are stronger financially, we are more prosperous and better prepared to take on the future than ever before in our history. And by forming partnerships, we have taken a state that was out of control in 1991, where we were spending $800,000 a day more than we were taking in, and we have been able, on a partnership basis, to turn that into a multi-billion dollar surplus. And we would not be talking about a $1.3 billion surplus, had we not cast, and had you not upheld, some 330 vetoes which blocked over $1.5 billion in new taxes, spending and fees.

Back in 1991, our budget reserves were exhausted, and now we have some $872 million in the bank -- money set aside to prepare us for whatever financial storms may lie ahead. We have repaid depleted reserves to the extent of $1.8 billion. Instead of spending 15 percent more than the rate of growth and personal income, we are now holding the rate of government spending below that key indicator. Incidentally, Minnesota's personal income is growing 30 percent faster than it is in the rest of America. We have not only halted the free-fall in our state's bond rating, but we have become the first state in some 24 years to recapture a triple-A bond rating from all three major financial rating institutions. There are only eight states in the United States that hold such a distinction. Perhaps best of all, we have gone from a state where we had cycles of endless tax and spending curves, and now we are in a position where we have so far been able to engage in more than a dozen tax cuts since 1991, giving back to taxpayers some $1.1 billion. And we are now proposing an addition of $1.7 billion in tax relief over the next five years, the largest in Minnesota's history.
I can accept the fact that a rising tide lifts all boats, and clearly we are delighted to be part of the national economy. But as Standard and Poor's indicated in their report, the economy is just a springboard. The other key is what you do with fiscal management. Now, we must also acknowledge that we could not have accomplished so much without adhering to the values embodied in this state and in its people -- values that call on us to grow first-rate jobs, to strengthen our quality of life and to show compassion for those in need. Minnesotans want a state where our children can find safety, opportunity, and breadth and richness of experience. We want a state that our children can be proud of, and today I am pleased to say I believe we are on that path.
Fifty-four thousand children who had no health insurance at the start of this decade are now covered through our MnCare program, ranking us second in the United States. We have become a national model for welfare reform, moving recipients not only into jobs, but much, much more importantly is lifting families out of poverty. 8,550 fewer families today rely on welfare than they did last year.
And while we are on the subject of jobs, we have also cut, on a bipartisan basis, workers' compensation premiums some 35 percent, saving employers $121 million and helping to create a competitive business climate that will continue to steadily grow jobs in Minnesota.
We have also begun to stem the rising tide of crime. In this last year, Minnesota has seen a decrease of seven percent in the most serious crimes, taking a step toward renewing our sense of security.
Now, I have reserved for the last reform, which is perhaps the most meaningful to me -education. We challenged the status quo and succeeded. We are now making decisions based upon what is best for the child, not the educational bureaucracy. And this month, for the first time ever, all of our public school students in grades three, five and eight are taking statewide standardized tests for reading and math, thereby giving parents, teachers, and the community a benchmark by which to judge their progress. Our first in the nation charter schools are setting new standards for innovation and flexibility. In just the last year, we have more than doubled to 30 the number of these creative schools. We have funded school technology, and within the next two years, we will be number one in America in the ratio of computers to students. For the first time ever, some of those students today are listening and watching this address on their computers at school via the Internet.
Our goal has been to put children first and, at the heart of all of our reforms, is our sincere belief that there must be competition in the educational system, whether public, private or parochial, every family in America should have the right to send their children to that school that best serves their child's needs.
Already, in this legislative session, there are those who seek to turn the clock back. But rest assured that, as Governor, I will do everything that I can to make certain that choice, competition, and quality continue to drive our commitment to education. I will fight to see that every single family in this state has the same educational choices for their children as the President, the Vice President, and all of our members of Congress.
We in America always define the American dream in the context of access to education. Millions of our families that came from foreign shores came here with that one ideal: that we could sacrifice our life, work hard so that our children could have access to the best educational experience, and on that basis, we could build the kind of egalitarian society that we all say that we want. We cannot, as a society, grant to the least -- the least amount of education -- but, rather, the same access that we give to those who have the most. That is what the American dream is all about. We in Minnesota will be the first state in America to realize that dream.
That also means that we are firmly committed to Minnesota's new graduation standards. The next century will demand more of our children, and we want to make absolutely certain that our children are prepared for that challenge. In all of this, as I have noted, we must be guided by those values that embrace Minnesota's people -- values, again, that call upon us to strengthen our quality of life, to show compassion for those in need and, first and foremost, to create an environment that is conducive to the growth of quality employment opportunities. Together, we have built an enviable record reforming education, reforming health care, reforming welfare, reforming state finances, reforming workers' compensation. The fact is that we have accomplished more solid reforms than any state in the United States.
Now, there will always be those who will look back and say, "Well, you can coast through the next Legislative session, while we await new leadership." But, I would remind them that competition waits for no one. Each and every year, we owe it to ourselves, and we owe it to the people of this state to endeavor to be better than we are. Now, granted, this state is enjoying its lowest unemployment rate ever. Granted, we are number one in the nation in job growth, more than 354,000 jobs have been grown over the past seven years. Granted, we have gone from a climate of job losses to one in which there are not enough skilled workers to fill available positions. The fact is, we do face new challenges. And we can either chose to ignore those challenges and see those successes gradually ebb away, or we can commit ourselves to change and to meeting the expectations that our people have of us. And to take advantage of the most precious resource that we have, which is our people.
It is my prayer that you and I, working together, can meet those challenges. We must strengthen the institutions that have always been the engines of job growth in this state -our institutions of higher learning. Never in our history has Minnesota needed higher education more than today. Never before have there been as many compelling reasons to justify bonding requests of $252 million for the University of Minnesota and $167 million . for the Minnesota State Colleges and Universities system, as well as those appropriations that are contained in our supplemental budget. These proposals must be funded in their entirety.
Now, much has been made of the size of the bond bill. But let me remind you that our package falls $200 million below our debt service guidelines. These requests are not simply requests for bricks and mortar. Our bill strengthens higher education. It enhances the environment and helps build communities throughout Minnesota. I want to thank Morrie Anderson, the new Chancellor at MnSCU for his leadership. He recognizes that 70 percent of the jobs we create in the future will not require a four-year degree but will require some post-secondary or technical training. To help students move into these jobs, part of our funding package calls for some $11 billion in new spending to forge partnerships between the MnSCU system and five high-growth Minnesota industries: precision manufacturing, computer software, printing and graphics, health and all of the occupations related to health and taconite production. Education and training programs in these key industries will be patterned after current successes. And what are they? A partnership with Northwest Airlines that will train air transport mechanics over the next two years. A partnership with IBM to help move students into high-paying jobs as computer systems network programmers. MnSCU is rapidly building a partnership between those people who create jobs and the whole system of education. That relationship, that partnership, is something you and I must invest in.
We also are blessed to not only have the outstanding leadership of Chancellor Anderson but also the vision of the new President of the University of Minnesota, Mark Yudof. In addition to his search for the all-American pancake, he has also laid out a sturdy vision for the future of the University and how it relates to all of us as citizens of the state of Minnesota. For over 150 years, we as citizens in this state, have invested in the University of Minnesota. In return, the University has given us educated citizens, advances in science and medicine, and a higher quality of life. Eighty percent of the students who graduate from the University of Minnesota remain citizens of this state.
Now, in order for these students to stay competitive with their peers across the nation and the world, we have proposed a number of key initiatives, including renovation of the Walter Library, a building in which all too few of us have spent any time. But it is truly one of the campus' oldest buildings, and the dream of the University of Minnesota is to transform it into a digital technology center. On the inside, students will have access to a state-of-the-art research facility. On the outside, we will preserve the building's elegant and distinctive architecture. We also proposed a new library at the University of Minnesota - Duluth's campus, designed to expand its capabilities into the largest information resource center in northeastern Minnesota. We proposed a new institute for molecular and cellular biology. As hard as it is for most of us to conceptualize, scientists have discovered that research at the cellular and molecular level is critical to scientific discovery. Through those discoveries, all of us win.
I want the University of Minnesota, through its research, to make us the lead state in the world in the development of medical technology. We have long excelled as a state in this area, and we must continue to be the leading light in medical education, medical training and medical research. Recall for a moment, that it was the University of Minnesota that trained Christiaan Barnard, who first performed the human heart transplant in 1967 and then went on to share his knowledge with countless other physicians. It was a year later that University of Minnesota physicians, Robert Good and Richard Hong made medical history by performing the world's first bone marrow transplant. And two decades later,

Minnesota was again inspiring the nation when a team led by Dr. Stuart Jamieson successfully performed the nation's first heart-lung transplant. That list goes on and on.
The reality is that the University of Minnesota and the Mayo Clinic are two of the finest medical institutions in the world, and we are committed to making absolutely certain that we give them the resources that are necessary for them to continue their work and to pursue excellence.
And it is for that reason that I am asking this Legislature to restore some $26 million in funding that was eliminated by the federal government. And why? To provide for medical research and medical education at both the University of Minnesota and the Mayo Clinic.
Now, if, as I have said, higher education is the engine that drives our job growth, then our business climate is the fuel that propels the train down the tracks. When I took office in 1991, one of the principal complaints was that Minnesota's high tax rates stifled economic growth. At that time, our commercial and industrial property tax rate stood slightly over 5 percent. It was far and away higher than our surrounding states, and very likely the highest in the United States. Now we have shrunk that rate down to some four percent. In the budget that I am submitting to you, I propose to reduce it down to the level of 3.5 percent and, for the apartment class, I want to reduce their rates down to 2.5 percent.
While this proposal will not cost the homeowner one dime, it will grow jobs, and it will grow our economy. In fact, if our plan is successful in this biennium and the next, tax relief will total some $2.4 billion. This spring, Minnesotans will receive a rebate equal to 20 percent of their property tax bill. We want that same tax relief extended through 1999. We believe that we must return the bulk of the surpluses to the taxpayers from whom it came.
But a large part of a healthy business climate also demands that we, as a state, follow on a very, very cautious and considerate course. We must have stable finances in order for our state to continue winning the competition for new jobs and new businesses.
As many of you know, I recently returned from a trade mission to Asia. I was privileged to have the opportunity to meet with the President of China, the Prime Ministers of Singapore and New Zealand, as well as their economic advisors. And I will tell you, it was sobering. The world faces a potential economic crisis if the United States and Japan do not act swiftly and wisely.
I left Asia wondering why, why we have shared in the upside of the market increase with record profits and then expect to not share in the downside. In light of those realities, I will again repeat my call for a separate reserve account dedicated to the Asian crisis. I want to make certain that we cushion any potential blow to our budget that may be caused by turmoil in those countries. Furthermore, I intend to ask this Legislature not only to set aside the $200 million I had previously recommended, but depending on the outcome of the February revenue forecast, to hold in reserve a total of $400 million, an increase of some $200 million. And then, if the impact of the Asian markets is less than anticipated and if the revenues prove to be sustainable, particularly in the out years, then the Legislature can come back with new leadership and use those funds to enact additional tax cuts. I think that is the prudent course for us to take as a state.

Lower taxes, a healthy economy and high quality jobs are the bread and butter issues that, by necessity, all of us care about. But Minnesotans value more than necessities. We also value that which enriches our souls. All those things, ranging from the arts to the great outdoors. Minnesota's outdoors are central to our quality of life. That is what we do with our families. We go to the lakes, we visit our state parks, we camp, we ski, we snowmobile, we hunt and some of us even try to fish. Our $202 million Access to the Outdoors initiative is an investment in an area that embodies our identity as a state. It builds upon this state's outstanding record of environmental protection, a record enhanced by more than $2.2 billion of investment since 1991, for projects that range anywhere from cleaning up the Minnesota River to improving our soil and air quality. This year, we seek to improve every state park in Minnesota. We want to add 100 miles of new trails, regenerate thousands of acres of forest and put many, many more acres into wildlife habitat. In addition, we want to make it simple to obtain recreational licenses through a one-stop shopping system that will be available at computer terminals all across the state.
Included in this comprehensive package is a new park of historic magnitude. It is the Veterans Memorial Park with the USS Des Moines as its centerpiece, to honor those to whom we owe our deepest debt of gratitude -- veterans who fought and died for the liberties that we now take for granted.
Those who served in World War II and the veterans of all wars, before and after, sacrificed greatly for us. Now they call upon us to make a small gesture in return. To those of you who have accused us of overzealousness on this project, I say that it is better to err on the side of caring too much than too little. I think it is better to push too fast and too hard than not at all. My prayer is that each governor from those generations that suffered through war will make absolutely certain that we remember those young men and those young women who risked and gave of their lives, so that we could enjoy the freedom that we have today.
The project in Duluth is designed not only as a memorial to the past and to those who served. It is also designed as a lesson, a reminder, to our young children. There were a
.lot of 17-year-olds and a lot of 18-year-olds who would have loved to have been home.
But, instead, they were asked to assault Okinawa and lwo Jima. They were asked to lose their lives and risk their lives at the Battle of the Bulge or to fly bombing missions over Berlin. And now they ask us, please remember those who gave so much of themselves for us. And I ask of you that we dedicate a monument to their courage, to their commitment, but also to our future.
Just as I call upon us to demonstrate compassion for those who have served so well, I am also calling on all Minnesotans to renew our commitment to the younger members of our society. Those of us who love this state -- and everyone here does --we know that we are a compassionate people. Few of us would ever turn our back on those in their time of need. Witness the tremendous outpouring of help during the floods last year. People from every corner of the upper Midwest volunteered to assist, volunteered to make someone's life better, and we identified with their tragedy.
That was a very visible crisis. Now there is mounting evidence that suggests that we are in the midst of another crisis, a silent one. Each year, thousands of babies are exposed to prenatal alcohol and, as a result, far too many of our children are subject to lifelong

disabilities, including mental retardation. Society -- we -- pay a rising price in costs for special education, out-of-home placements and corrections -- up to $1 million over the lifetime of a single victim. The tragedy is that it's all preventable. The bottom line is this: pregnant women cannot drink alcohol.
I particularly want to thank my wife, Susan, on behalf of this Administration and on behalf of the people of Minnesota, for her dedication, her leadership, and her genuine concern for our children. She has been not only a magnificent partner, but she truly loves those children. It is my prayer that when she and Judge Joan Lancaster submit their report tomorrow, that every single one of us will identify with their love and express our love in exactly the same way. They intend to present to us a comprehensive list of recommendations designed to combat this affliction. Our budget proposes $5 million in additional funding, so that they can press forward with education and prevention strategies. I very, very much want your support on this issue.
A compassionate people cannot tolerate our children starting out with one strike against them while in the womb. Nor, can we tolerate reports of children living in homeless shelters. The wonderful success story of our Minnesota economy has created thousands of jobs, record low unemployment and all of us feel a certain sense of security that was absent just a few years ago. Through our efforts to reform welfare, we, as a society, are now demanding that our brethren make every effort to work. The problem is that many of those first-time jobs may not pay much more than the minimum wage. As such, we have an obligation to ensure that there is sufficient affordable housing to meet the needs of every single one of our citizens.
In our supplemental budget, we have proposed $10 million to preserve apartments made more affordable through government assistance. Because federal assistance rates have not kept up with the marketplace, owners might well opt out of that program and therefore, the reliance on state help becomes greater and greater. Thousands of Minnesotans are now desperately seeking homes. In light of the severity of this problem, I am pledging to you today that we will increase our budget requests by an additional $5 million.
Serving the needs of troubled children and providing housing alternatives also forms the basis for our proposal to create the state's first residential academies, also called the boarding schools. We need to find a way to give children who have spent years bouncing around the foster care system a sense of permanency and a place to succeed. We also recognize that education is not a "one size fits all system". We know that people like former Minnesota Viking Joe Senser, who attended a residential academy, that without such a school, might well have landed in our criminal justice system.
I remember a few years ago talking to a young boy in one of our facilities in Minneapolis. He was a status offender. He was a runaway, a truant. He ran away because every time he went home, his father beat him within an inch of his life. And our system kept sending him back. We have to recognize that all parents are not equipped to be good parents. Our love, our commitment and our energies must focus entirely on the well-being of that child.
Now, we sit back as a body, and we complain about rising crime. We complain about the violence of adolescence, and we come in with strategies designed to lock them up for

longer and longer and longer. Until recently, we were on course to build a new prison every three years. But we began to recognize that if we could just focus more of our energies on preventing the problem, we could not only save an enormous amount of money, but we could save lives.
It is my hope that our entire system coming together -- judicial, executive and legislative -can focus entirely on the well-being of the child. Boarding schools become remarkable options to allow kids to escape from families that simply don't work -- families beset with violence, drugs, alcohol and crime; and allow them to go into a campus setting with a caring, dedicated, committed faculty and a community that truly wants them and say "We will work with you, and with our love, with our help, you will succeed." That is what it's all about.
The economic and human reality is that it costs us some $40,000 a year to keep a child at a juvenile detention center. That is more than an entire year's tuition at places like Harvard. We have to ask ourselves if it makes sense to spend money in that way, or does it make more sense to appropriate $12 million to build three residential academies so we can prevent some of these problems before they occur. It is my prayer that your answer will be a resounding "yes./I
We have in our audience some children from St. Joseph's Home in Minneapolis, whom I would like to now recognize. Today, we were led in prayer by Father Boxleitner of St. Joseph's. He and so many others, who work with children and who give their lives to the well-being of children, know full-well what this proposal means. It means a sense of permanency. It means an opportunity for success. Go back in your lives and every single one of you, at a point of stress, at a point of despair, had someone come to you, put a hand on your shoulder and say, "I'll help you."
That is precisely what we must do with our young people. In every single one of our endeavors, we must continue to focus on their well-being. I want them, all of our children, to grow up in an environment that focuses on opportunity over entitlement. To become part of a society that is healthy and is competitive, and that each of them is free to pursue their own individual happiness and to do it in such a way that it builds a sense of community.
We all, particularly those of us who are elected, recognize how fragile a democracy is. We recognize that our communities expect the very best from us. It has been my privilege to have served for the past eight years as governor of this state. It has been an even greater privilege to have had the opportunity to serve for some 30 years. And it has indeed been a tremendous honor to work with you on both sides of the aisle, building the kinds of coalitions and partnerships necessary to focus on our future.
When I opened my speech this afternoon, I talked about how well positioned we were to enter the next century. But in order for us to be well positioned, we had to develop policy, we had to engage in contentious debate and we had to seek alternatives. But at all times, we had the obligation to focus on the future. Our dream as an administration was "Don't focus on the moment. Don't cave into the immediate needs, but rather keep your eye on the long term./I Think of what it will be like to walk by the Capitol 20 years from now and

to be able to say, 'Well, I remember back in 1993 we started this. And in 1992, we did this. And in 1996, we did that. "' And the truth is, if we have done our job right, then we can look back with a tremendous amount of joy and say, "I'm honored and delighted to have served." To all of you, I can only say thank you. Thank you for your courtesies. Thank you for your kindness. I particularly want to thank the leadership. I know how much is expected of you. To those who have served in the past and those who serve today, I am told that some 70 percent of the members of this body were not here in 1991. Let me tell you, you did not miss much! But to Speaker Carruthers, to President Spear, Majority Leader Moe, Minority Leader Senator Day, Minority Leader Steve Sviggum, and to all of the leadership that has served in prior years, I thank you so much for engaging and procuring. I can honestly say I think the people of Minnesota are extraordinarily well-served. Every community has the obligation to give us its best and its brightest. And we can simply act on that expectation. And I sincerely pray that we always keep our eyes on the future. And the future is our children. My dream, my personal dream is that some day one of those young people, a young person in trouble, a young person who is helped with the hand on the shoulder, will be standing here as your Governor. Thank you very much!
Distinguished guests, distinguished members of the Legislature, thanks for the opportunity to report to you and the good people of Minnesota on the condition of our State. Our State is awesome. It remains one of the best in the country. But, as Bob Dylan wrote, "The times they are a changin'." We're in a new kind of war - started by sucker-punching cowards. The battle's here, on our shores, and it undermines our sense of security. We're in a new kind of economy. Capital investments, ideas and data are now flung around the world with a click of a mouse. And, we've got a new kind of state budget: it's terrible. Our freeways are clogged. Moms and dads are always in a time vice - between work and family. Our schools seem to be in constant crisis. Health care costs are eating our paychecks and government budgets alive. Our prisons are overflowing. Big parts of rural Minnesota are being left behind. Our beautiful Minnesota environment is under increasing stress. And, we've got more people in need and not enough resources to help them. And the beat goes on. These challenges are not the result of a lack of caring or lack of government spending. This state's spending doubled in just the last ten years. We're one of the highest taxed, highest spending states in the nation. Yet, even with government spending more and more and more, our momentum and quality of life have stalled out. We're in a financial crisis - the likes of which Minnesota has never seen. The largest budget deficit in the history of the State - times two or three - is staring us in the face. It's huge. It's mean. It's ugly. It's the Incredible Hulk of budget deficits. And it could get worse. A prolonged war with Iraq, an economic downturn or another major act of terrorism will worsen the deficit. We need to come together, as leaders and as Minnesotans, on a plan to cut the Goliath down to size and then build a brighter future. The Minnesota our parents and grandparents knew is a fond memory for many of us. But we can't take the same path as the generations that preceded us - it doesn't exist anymore. We need to reinvent Minnesota for our children and grandchildren. We can still rely on our great Minnesota principles and values as our compass. But we need to lead boldly and chart our own course to a new "Good Life in Minnesota." As governor, that's what I am going to do. 


As President Bush reminded us after the Columbia tragedy, great endeavors are never without great risk.
These days demand great courage and sacrifice from us all. This crisis will be only the most recent chapter in Minnesota's history of courage.
Last week at Camp Ripley and this week at the Marine Corps Reserve Center in Minneapolis, I had the privilege of thanking and helping to send off more brave men and women leaving their families to serve our country in the war on terror.
Many will be gone for a year or more. Many leave behind confused and distraught young children. I saw a heartbroken, sobbing four year old desperately clinging to the knee of her daddy, pleading with him not go. I tried to tell her that her daddy was a hero; that he was keeping us all safe; and that we loved him, too.
They go because it's their duty. They go because they understand commitment to principle. They go because they understand the need to sacrifice in times of crisis and peril.
Minnesotans have courage.
Today we have two very special guests with us. They're Harold "Snuff" Kervers and Alf Larson. They're survivors of the Bataan Death March, where 16,000 U.S. and Filipino soldiers died as they were forced to march without food and water to a Japanese prison camp. It was one of the most horrific chapters of the Second World War.
I met these patriots recently at a reception in honor of Alf's service to our country. One of Alf's friends heard about his story only after Alf reluctantly shared it in his eighties - after keeping it to himself for most of his life.
Minnesotans have courage.
They understand commitment to principle and the need to sacrifice in times of crisis. Help me thank these two remarkable Minnesotans.
If we go back 140 years, there occurred one of the greatest moments in Minnesota's history of courage.
On the very day Fort Sumter was fired upon and the Civil War began, our second governor, Alexander Ramsey, happened to be in Washington D.C. When he heard the news, he went immediately to the White House and pledged Minnesota's militia to President Lincoln. That militia was the first state unit committed to the war effort for the Union - the Minnesota 1st Voluntary Infantry Division - or the "Minnesota 1st" as they became known.
Just a short time later, the unit played perhaps the pivotal role of the entire war during the Battle of Gettysburg.
During the battle, a force of a thousand Confederate soldiers charged the middle of the Union army's lines in an effort to split them in two. Union General Hancock ordered Minnesota's unit to charge out and meet the attack - even though they were outnumbered 20 to 1.
He said this later about Minnesota's heroes:
"I ordered the men to charge because I saw I must gain five minutes time. Reinforcements were coming on the run, but I knew before they could reach the threatened point, the Confederates, unless checked, would seize the position. The charge was necessary. I was glad to find such a gallant body of men willing to make the terrible sacrifice."
Eighty-two percent of the Minnesota 1st fell in those five minutes, the largest percentage loss of life of ANY unit during ANY engagement of the war. Had General Lee succeeded in that charge and that battle, the tide of the war could have turned. In their five minutes of courage and ultimate sacrifice, the Minnesota 1st changed the course of history and this nation.
Courage and sacrifice is not limited to those in uniform.
It's on display in our homes, neighborhoods, charities, places of worship, and businesses every day and in every town across this Great State.
Yes. Minnesotans have courage.
We understand commitment to principle and the need to sacrifice in times of crisis.
And we need that now. We have our duty to perform. Let's get at it.


Our work starts with solving the State's budget crisis. It's job one, two, three and maybe four.
The deficit we face is caused by spending too much, not by taxing too little.
The revenues coming into the State are projected to grow by 6.6 percent, which is a normal level in Minnesota's modern history. What's out of control is our government spending. Unless we change things, our state budget is expected to grow by 14.4 percent during the upcoming biennium.
I don't know many Minnesotans whose paychecks are growing by 14.4 percent.
This isn't brain surgery, folks. The State is simply spending more than it is taking in. And now we need to do what any Minnesota family who faces a financial challenge would do - sit down together at the kitchen table and figure it out.
Families can't raise taxes to get out of a jam -- and we won't either.
People will say reductions in funding for government programs are an intolerable sacrifice or that we're sending our state back to the Stone Age.
What they won't tell you is that the budget we'll be submitting will actually increase the overall level of state government spending and that this will be the largest budget in Minnesota history.
And, they won't tell you that even after the cuts, we'll remain one of the biggest government spending states in the nation.
When the protests come, and they'll come loudly and often, I hope you'll help me share this message:
We're at war. Our economy is in deep trouble. Thousands and thousands of our fellow Minnesotans have lost their jobs. The sacrifices we'll be asking government to make are no different than the sacrifices families, businesses, workers and all organizations across this State are already making every single day.
And one more thing: the difficulties we face and the cuts we'll be making are nothing -- they are nothing -- compared to the sacrifices made by the generations before us or the sacrifices the men and women of our armed forces are making today.
We spent our way into this crisis. We're not going to tax our way out of it.
For some, that's an outrageous position. The people of Minnesota don't think so. As I travel around this great state, people agree that we shouldn't raise taxes.
Solving our budget deficit without raising taxes should not be a partisan issue.
Look to our east. The Governors of Wisconsin and Michigan -- who are Democrats -- have said they will not raise taxes. They have joined with their legislative leaders to make a bipartisan commitment to solve their deficits without new taxes.
We should have a united front against the deficit in Minnesota. Today, I'm asking legislators from both parties to join with me and most Minnesotans to protect hardworking Minnesota families from having government take even more from their paychecks.

Our budget and our agenda is not just about balancing the books. It'll also be about re-tooling, reforming and improving government so we reinvigorate our quality of life. I'm not interested in managing government. I want to change it.
Behind me is a portrait of Abraham Lincoln. When he took office, he set two main goals. First, preserve the Union. And second, build the transcontinental railroad.
Now, the fans of the Northstar Commuter rail project shouldn't get overly excited about this reference. The point here is much broader.
Facing the greatest crisis in this nation's history, Lincoln knew securing the present was not enough. He had a vision and agenda for building the future beyond the immediate crisis.

We can't just solve the budget crisis. We also need to get about the business of re-building Minnesota's future.
The good news is that if we make the tough calls now, our budget situation is going to come around within three years. Better days will come if - if - we lead now.
And while we don't have much new money to spend, we do have the power to create new and much more effective ways to spend the money we do have.

The education of our children and grandchildren is one of our highest duties.
It wasn't that long ago that Minnesota was the epicenter of innovation in education. If something big and good was happening in education reform, it was happening here.
We still have a great education system, but we've become complacent and we're treading water. We need to reclaim our place as the best education innovators in the country.
Here's what we need to do to get started:
1. Get back to the core mission.
The main thing is to keep the main thing the main thing. Educating children and improving student learning is the main thing. Not "feel good" curriculum. Not focusing on attitudes instead of academics. We're going to start this effort to refocus by renaming the Department of Children, Families and Learning the Minnesota Department of Education.
2. School accountability begins with parents.
Parents need to be more accountable. Parents must do their part. Minnesota moms and dads, we need to make sure our children get a good night's rest before school, and come to school fed and ready to learn.
When they're at school, children need to behave and it's the parent's job to help ensure behavioral problems don't continue. And when our children return home, both they and their parents need to understand that homework and tutoring by parents is more important than American Idol, WWE, DVD's or getting to the next level on the Grand Theft Auto video game.
As working parents with two young children, Mary and I know how challenging this can be. The First Lady, who is with us here today, is an extraordinary wife and mom and our family is so grateful for her.
For the parents who can't or won't answer this call, we need to find mentors, tutors and others who will.
3. The Profile of Learning needs to be abolished and replaced with something better.
Minnesota started America down the path of uniform standards for schools. But we've veered badly off track.
Our children deserve nation-leading academic standards that are clear, rigorous and focused on what students need to know. And I trust teachers to know how to help students reach those standards.
4. We need a new approach to educating our neediest children.
As good as our schools have been, we're leaving too many children behind. And the sad reality is, they tend to be poor, disabled, or children of color.
I will not stand by and allow another generation of disadvantaged children to be cast aside.
In some of our highest spending school districts, less than 1/2 the students graduate, and many who do need remedial education. That's not good enough. For these children, we need to be more creative.
My administration is committed to giving the parents of these children more options. Who is against giving poor, failing or disabled children more opportunities - and why would you be?

5. Reward great teachers.
The best and brightest students in the world need the best and brightest teachers in the world. That means paying good teachers more for excellent teaching. We need to move towards performance pay plans for school staff.
6. Create a school funding formula that is fair and understandable.
The current school funding formula is broken and too complicated.
In the coming weeks, we'll name a panel of school finance experts and interested citizens to begin the process of redesigning our school funding formula. After receiving their recommendations, we'll ask the Legislature to authorize demonstration projects that will allow a dozen districts to try out the new ways of funding schools. Whatever works best should be available to districts statewide.
Better schools are the ticket to opportunity and a better quality of life for future Minnesotans.

And so is a job.
We're the place that invented toasters, thermostats, water-skis and Spam. We heal the world, feed the world and sell the world pacemakers. We dug the iron ore than won two world wars. But our economy is in trouble.
We've lost 38,000 manufacturing jobs in the last four years. That's nearly all of the manufacturing jobs we gained during the entire decade of the 1990's. We're hemorrhaging the types of jobs where average Minnesotans can still make a good wage and have decent benefits.
We need a full range of job opportunities in Minnesota to sustain the quality of life for everybody. I'm sick and tired of stimulating the economies of places like Wisconsin and South Dakota with our jobs.
Here's what we need to do:
1. Do no further harm.
Taxes chew up the bottom line of job creators. We can't make a bad situation worse.
2. Create JOB Zones.
Today, there's an acute shortage of good paying jobs in Greater Minnesota.
From East Grand Forks to Hibbing to Luverne to Spring Grove, there are communities and families and small businesses that need a reason to hope - and a chance to grow jobs. Today I'm calling on the Legislature to enact my plan for JOB Zones to provide an economic adrenaline boost to the most economically challenged areas of the state.
3. Invest at home.
The State Board of Investment should invest more in Minnesota companies. Many states already have gone down this path. It's resulted in more investment and jobs in their states.
4. Build on our strengths.
It's easier to ride a wave than to create one.
When it comes to future job growth, our state's economic health hinges on human health. We're a world leader in cutting edge medical technologies. Genomics, medical devices and biotechnology offer the promise of a longer life and the opportunity for more good jobs in Minnesota.
We need to rekindle the entrepreneurial spirit of Minnesota's colleges and universities to make our state a global leader in this rapidly emerging industry.
I will lead efforts to bring the Mayo Clinic and the University of Minnesota together to make two of the nation's premier providers strong partners in developing the treatments, devices and medicines that will revolutionize medical care within a decade.

It will also be a big boost to our economy.
5. Provide greater incentives for investments in new Minnesota businesses.
Once we get our heads above water with the budget, we should provide greater incentives for venture capital investment in new Minnesota companies. To build jobs, we need to be more friendly to job-creators and investment- makers or every one of us will pay the price. We need to stop the things that drive jobs away and start doing more of the things that bring jobs here to stay.

A great education and a good job don't mean much if we're not safe.
The safety of our citizens is government's first duty. We're in a global war against terrorism, and we need to keep our guard up by taking several actions:
1. Keep track of foreign visitors by putting their visa expiration dates right on their drivers licenses.
We shouldn't give a four-year driver's license - Minnesota's most important identity document - to people who may only legally be in this country for a few weeks. This common sense legislation passed the House with a majority of Republicans and Democrats voting for it. Today, I'm calling on the Senate to quickly embrace this important prevention tool that our law enforcement community has endorsed.
2. Help authorities communicate in time of crisis.
The men and women who risk their lives responding to an emergency need to be able to talk to each other. If disaster strikes here, many of the first responders have radios that don't allow them to talk to each other. This is especially true in Greater Minnesota. It's a problem that will cost lives in the event of a real emergency.
I will use federal terrorism dollars to accelerate Minnesota's efforts to allow First Responders to communicate.
3. Share information with local and federal authorities.
One of the lessons of September 11th was that the failure of agencies to share information made us more vulnerable. We won't repeat that mistake in Minnesota. One of our priorities will be to complete the work of linking our criminal justice systems to protect the lives of Minnesotans.
4. Serve crime victims better.
Victims of crime are now poorly served by uncoordinated programs that were designed to help them. We're going to pull together crime victim and anti-violence efforts into a new Office of Justice Programs to provide a seamless system of services.

In addition to keeping people safe, we need to improve the ability of Minnesotans to travel.
We need to change the culture and the approach to building Minnesota's transportation infrastructure. Our projects take too long, cost too much, and don't move enough people and goods from point A to Point B. This burdens our economy and compromises our quality of life.
MNDOT needs a shake up, and I don't know a better shaker than Lieutenant Governor Carol Molnau. She'll find waste and end it. She'll locate red tape and cut it. She'll find money to save and reinvest it.
We will move our transportation system forward.

Health care is at the same time Minnesota's costliest problem and its greatest opportunity for change. Rising health care costs are fueling a big part of our budget deficit and they're squeezing the budgets of workers, employers, and families in a very painful way. If any state can solve this problem, it's Minnesota.
Former U.S. Senator Dave Durenberger has agreed to lead a Blue Ribbon Task Force of Minnesotans to help us chart a course for the future of health and health care in Minnesota. This task force will provide Minnesotans with a long range cost control strategy to make health care more affordable. I expect this task force to finish its work within the next eight months.

With Senator Durenburger's leadership, I'm confident this effort will succeed.
Kids, jobs, public safety, transportation and health. Some will ask if we can afford to move forward with these new initiatives. We can't afford not to.

There's a story I've heard about John F. Kennedy.
In 1961, President Kennedy said: "...this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon, and return him safely to the earth."
The story goes, he was touring the Space Center in Florida a short time later. At one point during the tour, the President visited with a janitor. The young president said to the man, "Well, sir, what do you do here at the Space Center?" Without hesitating, the man answered, "I'm putting a man on the moon by the end of this decade, Mr. President."
Vision is a powerful thing. It motivates people because it connects their individual contribution, however small, to a great and noble purpose.
Today I want to issue a call to citizenship and service to every Minnesotan who hears my voice. Minnesota needs you -- now.
I got a letter recently from Phyllis Bakke of Northfield, who has joined us today.
Without commenting on her age, let me just say she's seen many governors come and go in her lifetime. She wrote to encourage me. When she read about the deficit, she did a simple thing. She sent me a dollar. This dollar.
I'm sure she's sent a lot of dollars to the Minnesota Treasury during her life. But she wanted me to know, and wants us all to know, she's going the extra mile for the state she loves. I'm going to keep Phyllis' dollar to remind me that addressing a meaningful challenge begins with one small step. And you know what Phyllis? When we've met the challenge and solved this crisis, I'm going to give you your dollar back.
Thank you for your Minnesota spirit of giving and sacrifice.
In a time so dominated by big government, big business, big labor and big media, perhaps we have lost our understanding of the role citizens can play.
The Minnesota Time magazine celebrated three decades ago was not the product of politicians, CEOs or talk radio. It was created by citizens who reinvented health care, education, and community.
As Minnesota approaches our 150th Birthday, we need to rediscover that civic service that made us great.
Perhaps we've all become too comfortable, too entitled, too quick to rely on government and too slow to take responsibility ourselves. We face an unprecedented global and financial crisis. Perhaps that is the privilege of our problem: to hear our own call to arms, our own call to service, our own call to sacrifice and our own call to leadership.
I ask you to serve wherever your conscience directs and your circumstances permit.
Shut off the TV and the computer and find somebody who needs your attention.
Learn about another culture and get to know and trust someone different than you.
Buy something on East Lake Street rather than on EBay.
Instead of going to a "feel good" movie, do something good and feel the real thing.
I want to make a special call to the citizenship of those who have chosen the serving professions. The teachers, nurses and doctors. The ministers, social workers, tutors, mentors, and public employees. Thanks for what you do.
We need you to help solve this challenge. For now, the answer can't be more money. But you can help a great deal because I know you have ideas on how to reform your professions from the inside out and how to revolutionize the way we heal, teach and build character. We need you and ask for your help.

One of my first visits after the election was to the Department of Public Safety. A supervisor there pulled me aside and said, "Governor: the key is not doing more with less. It's doing the right things well." That was Brian Lamb, my new Commissioner of Administration. He summed up what must become our common passion and vision.
And as Minnesotans have done throughout our history, we should seek strength beyond ourselves.
Isaiah wrote:
"Even youths grow tired and weary, and young men stumble and fall; but those who hope in God will renew their strength. They will soar on wings like eagles; they will run and not grow weary, they will walk and not be faint."
In that spirit and hope, and in the great heritage of service and sacrifice that is Minnesota, let us walk together. Then let us run. And one day soon, even soar.
May God bless you and may God continue to bless the great State of Minnesota."Why do we live here in Minnesota?" It's been 25 below, it seems like we only see the sun for a few hours during winter days, and we spend a lot of time shoveling snow. There are other places to live. Why do we live here?
That's the question I've been asking Minnesotans lately, and I've heard many different answers.
Some people told me they love being able to go "up north, to the cabin." Others said they love our great outdoors. Good schools. Less crime than other places. The value of being near family. Others say they love the change of seasons and all the fun things to do... like ice fishing.
I did hear a common theme from everyone: There's a special Minnesota spirit, and that's the reason we love our state.
Perhaps the greatest examples of our Minnesota spirit are the brave Minnesotans who serve in the United States Military.
Some of these men and women have made the ultimate sacrifice.
Seated in the gallery are Caroline and Larry Erickson and Karen and Arland Panchot, whose sons Brian Hellerman and Dale Panchot were two Minnesota soldiers who gave their lives in Iraq. Two other Minnesota soldiers, Ed Herrgott and Patrick Dorff, also lost their lives in combat in Iraq. While so very proud of their sons, their loss pains their families deeply. To the families: Your sons' sacrifices helped make this world a better place. We're grateful to them and to all the men and women who serve. Please join me in expressing our appreciation for these brave Minnesotans.

In the last couple years, we've been tested by war, recession, layoffs, terrorism and budget deficits. But I'm here to tell you, the spirit of Minnesota is strong and so is the state of our state.
We have reason to be optimistic.
A year ago, I stood here and said Minnesota government was 4.5 billion dollars in the hole. It was devastating news.
One year later, what story does Minnesota's checkbook tell?
When the budget forecast comes out later this month, I expect it to say we've made about 4 billion dollars worth of progress towards balance, and that we've built 600 million in reserves.
And we did it without raising taxes!
We're not out of the woods yet. We still have some deficit yet to fix now and in the future. But we've made tremendous progress.
The budget was not all we did this past year.
We finally repealed the convoluted Profile of Learning! And, we're replacing it with rigorous, high-quality learning standards.
Even with a mammoth deficit, we maintained per-pupil funding for core K-12 classroom functions.
With a record number of Minnesotans overseas defending that flag and what it represents, we reinstituted the Pledge of Allegiance in our schools. It's high time we did.
We established Job Opportunity Building Zones to bring jobs and growth back to rural Minnesota.
We put the visa expiration dates of foreign visitors right on their Minnesota driver's licenses to help law enforcement fight terrorism.

We positioned Minnesota to become a world leader in the coming bioscience revolution.
We jump-started road and bridge construction with the largest infusion of funding in our history.
We once again made work the focus of welfare reform.
We promoted justice and fairness by enacting lawsuit reform.
We enhanced the environmental protection of our land, air and water, including reaching a one billion dollar agreement to clean up old coal plants. The agreement will yield the most significant reduction in emissions since the federal Clean Air Act.
And remember, we did all this without raising taxes!
But as we contend for Minnesota's share of the future, we've not yet begun to fight.
The future is coming at us faster than it ever has. It's a tidal wave of change. If we don't get on top of it and ride it, it will drown us. We need to prepare Minnesota to take advantage of the change that's coming. The global economy is impacting our Minnesota economy with all the subtlety of a deploying airbag.
My passion as Governor is this: I want Minnesota to contend for its share of the future right now, and I want Minnesota to face its challenges and win.
To do that, we'll need to be at the top of our game. We're not going to carry the day on the size of our population and certainly not because of our weather.

We do need to be more competitive on things like taxes, regulations and health insurance costs, but we're never going to be a "bargain basement" state that can low-ball China or Mexico or even lots of other states on price. That's not our tradition in Minnesota, it's not our culture and it's not our future.
But that means to compete, we need to be quicker, faster, smarter, more energetic, more creative, more nimble, and more strategic than other states and our international competitors.
I'm excited about the challenge, and hope you are too. I want to develop every option, push every button, and explore every idea I can to get us another inch closer to being great.
Some think we can secure Minnesota's future just by adding more money to our past approaches.
Others think that all we need to do is cut taxes, regulations, and other government demands.
Government is not the answer and government is not the problem. We need to make government both leaner and more effective, and we can do both. To accomplish that, we need to do things differently.
At another time like this, FDR said:
"The country needs... the country demands bold, persistent experimentation. It is common sense to take a method and try it. If it fails, admit it frankly and move on. But above all, try something."
For starters, we need to forge a new spirit of unity and fair play in this place. We have huge challenges ahead us. We've got no energy to waste playing political splat ball.
There are three things on which we can all agree.

First, Minnesota is the most fertile place in America, not just for crops, but for ideas.
Second, Minnesota government lost its leadership edge a while ago, and we need to get it back. Good enough, isn't. We need more energy, vision and willingness to take risks.
And third, innovation and reform are the heart of who we are, the core of the Minnesota spirit.
The people in Two Harbors who invented sandpaper didn't know they were creating 3M. The people in Rochester who set up a new kind of hospital didn't know they were creating the Mayo Clinic. And I'm sure Mr. and Mrs. Hartman had no idea what they were doing when they created Sid.
Change creates new possibilities, new futures that never existed before.
The first big thing we should do is make sure no future Governor and Legislature has to face what we faced last year -- a mammoth, historic budget deficit.
Let's face it. Government is hard-wired to spend because people in political office get rewarded for saying "yes," not for saying "no." Disciplined decision-making usually only appears in times of crisis.
Just like families and hard-working Minnesotans, we should take steps to make sure we live within our means. Even credit cards have limits. It's a time to explore ways to prevent runaway spending by state government, such as limiting the growth of state spending to something around inflation plus population growth. Many other states have taken this step, and if it's done reasonably, it works well.
In addition, my agenda focuses on four categories: Education, Jobs, Health Care and Quality of Life.

I begin where it all begins, with education.
Minnesota has a great and proud tradition of having tremendous schools. There are many wonderful teachers and educators working hard every day to keep our schools performing well.
But we also now know that if you peel back the onion and focus on certain districts or school sites, too many children are being left behind at a time when the importance of education to Minnesotans, their families and our future has never been greater. The education debate has changed. It's no longer just about how much we spend. It's also about how we hold the system accountable for better results for our children.
For decades, Minnesota was a hotbed of education innovation and we need to get back our edge.
First, we need to tackle the sacred cow of education policy -- education finance reform. It's one of the most important things we can do. The current formula is too complex and that breeds a lack of accountability.
More importantly, we need to link the actual cost of educating a child to education funding. With standards, we know what children should learn and we can figure out how much that should cost.
The current formula is an artifact of history and political tweaking. It's become disconnected from accountability measures. It's reliance on only a per-pupil funding approach too dramatically impacts our districts with declining enrollment. We can do better.
Last year, I formed a task force on education finance reform. Their recommendations will be out soon. We're eager to hear them and work with you to develop a better school funding system for our children.

We also know that parents make or break student performance. In every way we possibly can, we need to encourage, challenge and require that parents do their job. Student to teacher ratios are important. Even more important is the ratio of time parents spend on their children's education. Any discussion about education performance or accountability should start right there.
Beyond parents, teachers are the next most important contributor to a child's education. In the gallery today is one outstanding Minnesota teacher. Mark Johnson risked his own life to save the lives of his students during the Rocori High School shooting last year. Mark, thank you for your courage and Minnesota spirit.
We proposed a series of initiatives this fall to improve education in Minnesota that include:
· Paying "super teachers" a lot more for performance; · Yanking drivers licenses from kids who skip class too often; · Providing parents and others with school report cards to
improve accountability; · Making Internet access more affordable for rural schools; and · Expanding charter schools in Minnesota and more.
The Minneapolis school district is our largest and our most challenged. I am enthusiastic about the bold moves advocated by Acting School Superintendent Dave Jennings in Minneapolis. I support his aggressive and innovative approach, and we urge the Legislature to do so as well.
It's also high time to strategically re-think the future of Higher Education in Minnesota. We need to make sure the system is structured, managed and governed in an optimal way to meet future needs. We've asked the Citizens League to lead a state-wide effort addressing the alignment and capabilities of our higher education programs.

We educate our children to prepare them for citizenship, life and to be ready for the workplace. Jobs are the glue that holds our state together.
One of the most important things we can do to grow jobs in this state is to not raise taxes. Tax increases hit job creators right where it hurts: the bottom line. If we want to compete, we need to prove to job creators we mean business on taxes.
But there's also much more we can do to make Minnesota more job-friendly.
Our current tax code contains a penalty on businesses for creating jobs and investing in Minnesota. We need to eliminate this anti-jobs tax and adopt a single factor formula for business taxes.
We need to leverage our strategic advantage in the emerging bioscience economy. I am asking you to fund, through the bonding bill, the historic new research partnership between the Mayo Clinic and the University of Minnesota. I also ask your support to enhance the bioscience zones we created last year. This is a huge opportunity and we can compete and win in this area.
Building the economy of the future also means helping Minnesota's bedrock industries find their place in the new economy. Citizens and members of my cabinet are working aggressively on ways to improve the competitiveness of our timber, mining and livestock industries. All three of these industries find themselves greatly impacted by domestic and global challenges.
The strength and vitality of our agricultural economy depends on the livestock industry, which is one of the best ways to add value to the crops we grow here. We hope you'll support our proposal to provide low-interest loans for modernization that will help farmers grow and compete.

Job creators in Minnesota need access to global markets for their products. Too many businesses have to ship through Chicago, which drives up their transportation costs. I propose that we lead efforts to have the private sector develop a large-scale regional distribution center for cargo.
We're also creating a one-stop shop for job providers to untangle red tape. We're improving the permitting process. We're streamlining technology so that more government services can be provided online. And, in a few weeks, we'll be proposing a major overhaul of our tourism marketing efforts.
As the national economy recovers, these steps and others will put Minnesota in a position to retain good jobs and compete for the jobs of the future.
Next I want to talk about something for which Minnesota is world famous: our health care and the health of our people. But even we have a major problem.
Medical costs and insurance premium increases are a tourniquet that is squeezing off the blood supply to every family, business and government budget in Minnesota. We need to act before these costs permanently damage our quality of life and our ability to compete.
You shouldn't have to get on a bus to get a fair deal on prescription medicines. You should just have to get online.
Last Friday was a historic day in Minnesota. With a click of a mouse, we became the first state in the union to give our citizens access to safe, effective and less expensive prescription drugs from Canada.
Powerful forces are gathering against this initiative. I need your support to stay the course. This is not the final answer to medical costs, but it will help.

As our population ages, we also need to ensure we have the best nursing homes and long-term care for our parents, grandparents, and soon enough, ourselves. We'll be announcing a full long-term care reform package in the coming weeks. But I'm asking the Commissioner of Health to implement the first step. We want to create a report card that can be used by consumers to evaluate the quality of care at each of Minnesota's nursing homes. We owe it to our seniors to have the best possible care available ­ and that starts with accountability.
Tomorrow, we'll be announcing the principles that will guide the next generation of bold health care reform in Minnesota. The Citizens Forum on Health Care Costs, led by Senator Dave Durenberger, will issue its recommendations.
Our approach will include leveraging the purchasing power of the state and other partners to force health care providers to use best practices and deliver higher quality results.
I'm also excited about several good ideas proposed by Representative Bradley, Senator Berglin, and others.
Now, I want to talk about our quality of life.
We love it here, but not everybody appreciates our Minnesota way of life. If we're going to convince talented, innovative people to stay here, invest here, and relocate here, we've got to have plenty of live bait on the hook. That will be a big part of whether we succeed in the new economy.
We need to continue to improve our quality of life and here's what I propose.
We absolutely need to improve public safety. Nothing much matters if you don't feel safe. The disappearance of Dru Sjodin is the latest mile marker along a trail of tragedy that is traveled far too often. Those tragedies threaten to undermine our sense of safety.

In order to maintain Minnesota nice for everybody else, we need to get Minnesota tough on criminals.
In my bonding proposal, I've allocated funding for 875 new Minnesota prison beds, one of the largest prisons expansions in our history.
For our most dangerous sex offenders, we need to keep them locked up longer. I also ask you to approve my comprehensive plan to bolster the system of civil commitment for those who should never be released into the community. For those who are required to be released, I ask for your support for our proposal to make those criminals wear GPS monitoring devices for more intensive supervision of such offenders.
It's time to give the people the chance to speak on the death penalty for those who commit unspeakable crimes, such as the murder of a child. The punishment needs to fit the crime. We ask that you let the people of Minnesota be heard on this issue by putting it on the ballot.
We also need to make our travel more safe by lowering the limit for drunk driving in Minnesota to the .08 standard. That change is overdue.
In addition to public safety, Minnesotans value our natural resources.
Minnesota's farmers are the original conservationists, because the land and water are their livelihood and their heritage. With their help, I know we can do a better job of protecting Minnesota's great outdoors. That's why I've proposed that we set aside 100,000 acres of marginal farm land to act as buffer strips between runoff and some of our most environmentally sensitive waterways, to create habitat and improve water quality. Let's move forward with this initiative.

In Minnesota, hunting and fishing aren't just hobbies, they're a constitutionally-protected way of life. We're bringing a new level of accountability to the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
We're trying to better serve the men and women who pay the bills for wildlife and habitat conservation. We've already taken action to consolidate the DNR's four fish and wildlife divisions into one, and to make sure that fish, wildlife and conservation are the agency's top priorities. We'll also continue with efforts to maintain and improve that focus.
After a decade of neglect and increased traffic congestion, in 2003 we made unprecedented progress in new and refurbished roads and bridges. Lt. Governor Carol Molnau's outstanding work at Mn/DOT financed the largest cash infusion in Minnesota history, jumpstarting many delayed projects.
We're pushing ahead with HOT lane and FAST lane projects to both expand capacity and finance the construction of new lanes. We're also working hard on local bridges and roads.
We also need to move ahead with more effective transit.
My bonding proposal contains preliminary funding for the Northstar commuter line, through one of the nation's fastest growing and most congested corridors. After rigorous review, this proposal has received support from President Bush, Senator Coleman, Congressmen Kennedy and Oberstar and many others. I also propose funding for a high-speed bus line following Cedar Avenue in the South metro.
We need to end chronic homelessness in Minnesota in the next ten years. We've developed a business plan to bring together the available public and private sector resources and expertise to tackle this problem once and for all, and we hope you'll help.

And I have one last issue that is very much on the minds of Minnesotans: gambling. I opposed the expansion of gambling in the past. However, we need to recognize that times have changed. The compacts negotiated with the American Indian tribes almost fifteen years ago do not reflect current circumstances ­ and we need to address the issue.
My preference is to keep gaming within its current contours, but we need to explore a better deal for Minnesotans, and that's what we're going to do.
This past year, Minnesota lost its head coach, Herb Brooks. During this NHL All Star week, he is being honored for all his contributions to the State of Hockey and America. He was a regular guy from the Eastside who stepped onto the world stage to face the toughest of opponents.
Herb's life is a model of the Minnesota spirit, the spirit of confidence in the face of incredible challenges. He understood that great challenges demand the best from within us.
We need to listen to Herb's locker room advice: This is our time, this is our moment.
Herb's son Dan is with us in the gallery. Dan, on behalf of us all, thanks for keeping your Dad's spirit alive.
But the Minnesota spirit is about more than tough-minded hockey coaches or military heroes, or special teachers. It's about all of us.
It's the spirit that makes us dance in the snow near castles made of ice.
It's the spirit of our rural neighbors who show up to harvest a friend's corn when they hear he's been hurt or sick.

It's the spirit that brings out volunteers for countless youth soccer teams, charity walks, food shelf collections, and mentoring programs. It's the spirit that raises an army of friends to walk the frozen, snow-covered roads and ditches of Polk County in search of a missing friend. And, it's that spirit that has brought generations of leaders to this historic room to serve. The Minnesota spirit. It's our legacy. It's our tradition. It's our future. It's made us different. It's made us great. And that's why we're here. Thank you and may God bless you. And may God continue to bless the great state of Minnesota.At 1:00 this morning, a dozen huge garage doors behind me flew open and this facility came alive as more than 15,000 blood and tissue samples began arriving from across the country and around the world. They're unloaded, processed and prepared for analysis before noon! That happens every day here because the Mayo organization of Rochester, Minnesota, does it better and faster than any place on the planet. But, 19 months ago, this building was empty and dark. The company that had built it just a few years earlier at great cost, moved its business and over 800 good jobs out of the country. It was a major blow to the Rochester area and the entire state. Today, almost 700 jobs have returned with more on the way! It's a great Minnesota comeback story. So, what can we learn from it? It tells us that Minnesota needs to be a global competitor. 
 
It reminds us that excellence matters and has a magnetic impact. It tells us again that science and technology are really important in the modern economy. It reinforces the importance of doing things fast. It again shows us the incredible value of an educated, innovative and productive workforce. It reminds us of the importance of public-private partnerships. This site was enrolled in our JOBZ program the very first day the program became available. And finally, it highlights the vast number of jobs that big economic engines like the Mayo Clinic produce - they're Minnesota's booster rockets. We all need to grasp the importance of the Rochester model. They're a successful global competitor. Why? Because they have seamlessly integrated science, technology, infrastructure, entrepreneurship, a partnering role for government, and lots and lots of hard work. Global competitiveness is Minnesota's strategic objective. We have lots of work to do to get us there. 
 
We've faced a lot of challenges the recession, the war, the ongoing threat of terrorism. But despite all that, Minnesota has tackled some tough problems and together, we've made progress. When I became Governor, Minnesota had a mammoth $4.5 billion budget deficit and zero reserves. We'll end the current budget cycle with the books balanced and our reserve and cash flow accounts restored. For sure, more budget work needs to be done, but we've made tremendous progress. We're now requiring our students to be measured against clear and workable education standards. We've taken major steps to rebuild our roads and bridges and to protect our environment. We're the first state in the nation to launch a program to help needy seniors obtain safe and lower-cost prescription medicines from Canada. And I will continue to urge the folks in Washington to open their eyes and fully open our doors to these needed medicines. We've launched the Smart Buy purchasing alliance that will show the nation how the health care market can be transformed to save costs and improve quality. 
 
Our traditional economic engines of agriculture, mining, timber and manufacturing are all displaying new signs of growth, opportunity and renewed vitality. And, through our JOBZ program and other means, we're adding jobs and growing the economy across the state. That last point is important because our progress needs to be measured by how much the private sector economy is growing, not how fast government is growing. High paying jobs are the key to our quality of life. Good jobs give our citizens the ability to take care of their families and freedom to enjoy life as they choose. The main credit for our recovery belongs to our job creators and working families, not government. This is not the first time that the importance of job growth has been emphasized in a State of the State address. You might remember that Governor Arne Carlson presented the State of the State address here in Rochester in 1994. Let me quote exactly what he said in that speech about the connection between jobs and taxes: 
"If we care about jobs, we must take a long-term pledge not to raise taxes - not now and not for years to come. Government can and must live within its means." Amen to that, Governor Carlson! 
 
A great deal has been said about my commitment not to raise taxes. It's a core value it's common sense it's important to keeping and growing jobs and it's mainstream! If you have any doubts about whether taxes are a competitive issue, look at nearby states. The Democrat Governors in the Midwestern states of Iowa, Michigan, Wisconsin and Illinois are all tackling their budget challenges while pledging not to raise taxes. They're joined by Democrat Governors in other job-seeking states such as New Mexico and Oregon. And while every state is different, Minnesota hasn't exactly been tightfisted in the last ten years. Since Governor Carlson gave his State of the State Speech here in 1994, state spending has nearly doubled. Inflation and population grew nowhere near that fast. I say again, we don't have a tax problem, we have a spending problem. Keeping a lid on taxes is not just good for the taxpayer. It's a powerful way to force government to be more accountable, set priorities and spend smarter. Let me repeat that: more accountable, set priorities and spend smarter--that's what we need to be about. But, there's much more to preparing Minnesota to become a global leader than just that, and we need to get moving. 
 
A hypercompetitive, fast-changing world demands that we approach things anew or we'll be passed by. Minnesota has more exposure to this risk than you might think. Our past success sometimes gives us a complacent attitude about change and the need to try new things. But listen to the words of visionary organizational leader Peter Drucker. He says this about the future: 
 "The things that got us here, will not get us there." The strategic mentality of too many of our public leaders today can be summed up as, "but this is the way we've always done it." We need to embrace change. We need to be bold. And, most importantly, we need to get moving. The people of Minnesota are ready for action. To the leaders in the room and to the leaders across Minnesota, I ask the question: are you ready for action? I sayLet's go Minnesota. Let's get moving. We've got work to do. It starts with setting priorities. 
 
Let me introduce you to Sara Gray. She's a senior in high school from Columbia Heights. She's 17. On the outside, she looks like a typical Minnesota teenager. She gets good grades. She was a cheerleader. She works at the Taco Bell. But she's more than that. She's a soldier in the United States military. I met her at a battalion meeting recently. I asked her why she signed up. I'll never forget her answer. She told me, "Governor, I want to serve my country. I want to give back what this country has given to me: freedom and protection." Our freedom and safety are in good hands with people like Sara and all of the men and women in our military. Join me in thanking Sara and all the people who serve. Minnesota's military members need more than our words. They need our help and support. That's why I'm asking the legislature to pass and fund additional financial incentives for service in the Minnesota National Guard as one of this session's top priorities. Next, we need to improve the way we educate our children. Minnesota has a right to be proud. But, our system of education was designed a long time ago. It needs to be updated and modernized. Last week, I announced my K12 school funding plan. It will increase average perpupil funding by 5.4 percent. 
 
My proposal offers even more incentives to school districts and unions who agree that teachers will be paid for performance, not just seniority. Minnesota is filled with many wonderful teachers, but the way we pay them is outdated. It's not geared towards accountability for results, and it doesn't treat teachers like professionals. You get what you pay for. If we pay for results, that's what we'll get. It's common sense it will help kids learn, and it will work. We also need big changes in our high schools. Too many of our 11th and 12th graders have academically "checked out." Our "Get Ready, Get Credit" initiative will give them and their parents a powerful incentive to check back in. We propose to allow every high school student to earn college credits without ever leaving their high school building. Under our proposal, a student who takes college preparatory classes and passes an exam paid for by the State, by the way will receive college credits as if the student had taken and passed the class in college. Our students will learn more, spend less time in college, and save mom and dad and themselves lots of money. They'll go further, accomplish more and do it all more quickly. 
 
Our need to improve education is not limited to K12. Higher education is not changing as rapidly as the marketplace or demographics in certain parts of the state. A prime example of that is here in Rochester. The Rochester area is projected to grow 70 percent in the next twenty five years, and its economic vitality is growing even faster. Rochester needs a strong higher education leadership structure with the responsibility and authority for decision making, and commitment to focus, coordination and planning for the future. That's why today I'm announcing a proposal for the Rochester area to take greater control over its own higher education destiny. Today, I propose that we create a university here in Rochester. The first step in this process will be to create a legal and governing entity that will be responsible for all current operations at the University Center with the exception of the technical college which will remain untouched by this proposal. The governing entity would have the option of maintaining current operations and courses or changing the focus to better serve the needs of students and the community. In the future, it might choose to become part of an existing institution of higher education. My budget announcement next week will include more than three million dollars to get this new University leadership structure started. 
 
We also need to encourage other institutions of higher learning to try new things as part of an effort to better serve their students and Minnesota. Specifically, campuses are trying to be everything to everybody. Our resources would be better utilized if we moved towards a Center of Excellence model. Winona State University President Darrell Krueger is living proof that the words "entrepreneur" and "educator" can go in the same sentence. He recently announced his retirement. As he did so, he proposed a bold new direction for Winona State. He calls his proposal "Do more, with more." He proposed increasing tuition at Winona State and using the additional resources to create a center of excellence in Winona. I'm pleased to support his exciting, innovative approach. While it may not be the right model for all our campuses, it's definitely worth a try at Winona. I'm also intrigued by the changes made in Colorado recently. They'll now send about two-thirds of their total state higher education appropriation directly to students rather than funding higher education institutions and bureaucracies. This will empower the customers students and their parents - to make choices that best suit their needs. 

I've asked Susan Heegaard, Director of HESO, to work with stakeholders to create a plan which would move Minnesota further toward funding public higher education students rather than institutions. Of course, accommodations will need to be made for high cost programs or colleges located in sparsely populated areas. I've directed her to have this plan ready for presentation during the 2006 session of the Legislature and for implementation in the 2008-09 State budget. Under this approach, colleges will need to be more accountable to their customers, more responsive to the marketplace and more accountable for results to succeed. Next, we need to make new investments that will make Minnesota more globally competitive. The list of investments to be made is long but let me focus on one as an example. Minnesota is the home of two world-leading medical research institutions located 90 miles apart. Historically, the University of Minnesota and the Mayo Clinic have been competitors. Two years ago, I was here in Rochester to announce they are now going to work together. This historic partnership will leverage the power of these two great institutions beyond what they could accomplish individually. 

The strength of their coming together will be an awesome force in the world's medical research marketplace, and it will bring great benefit to Minnesota. The partnership I announced two years ago had two key components. The first is construction of a new MayoU Genomics Lab here in Rochester. It was in my bonding bill proposal last year, and it's in my bonding bill proposal this year. I thank Speaker Sviggum and the House for passing a bonding bill last year with the project in it. I'm hoping both the House and the Senate will do the same this year. But, I want to be perfectly clear on this point: I won't sign a bonding bill this year without this project in it. The second part of my partnership plan is operating funds for research. We allocated a few million dollars last budget cycle as part for a pilot project to test the partnership and its effectiveness. It worked really well. Today, we're making the next installment payment and committing 20 million dollars more in funding for research. Fifteen million dollars will come from the State. 

And, I'm really pleased to announce that private sector partners are willing to help. The first partner to step up is Medica. Today, Medica is announcing a commitment of five million dollars. Please join me in recognizing and thanking David Tilford, CEO of Medica, who is with us today and whose foundation has committed the first legacy gift. I'm also excited to tell you that other partners will soon be joining and the total research amount will likely be well over the 20 million we're announcing today. Next, if Minnesota is going to be an effective global competitor, we need to reform and improve our health care system. We have two main challenges in this area: The first is that families and employers are being squeezed by health care premium increases they can't keep up with. They need relief. That's why we've formed the Smart Buy purchasing alliance to leverage the bulk purchasing power of sixty percent of Minnesota consumers to demand better health care at a better price. We are also proposing to empower consumers by expanding and encouraging the use of Health Savings Accounts, which are like IRAs and 401Ks, except they're for health care. They put consumers in charge and provide more health care choice and flexibility. 

The other big challenge is that our government welfare health care system is out of control and growing at a rate that will consume almost all of the state's budget within 15 years. If we don't get this under control, it will bankrupt the state and strangle our ability to fund our other priorities such as schools and roads. The longterm viability of those programs - and the state budget as a whole - demand responsible decisions now. Some will argue that we should raise taxes rather than slow the growth in these programs. That is simply unrealistic. Income tax revenues would have to double every eight years to pay for these programs at their current rate of growth. We must restrain the growth in these programs to sustainable levels by wisely and humanely changing them so they are comparable to surrounding states, and more focused on those with the fewest resources and the greatest needs. Next, Minnesota can lead the way globally by being the "renewable fuel capitol of America." We are already well on our way, and this year we will cement our lead when the Legislature passes my initiative to double the amount of ethanol in gasoline sold in Minnesota. Utilizing homegrown renewable fuels is good for our farmers, it's good for rural economic development, it's good for national security, and it's good for the environment. 

I would much rather have the fuel in our cars come from the Midwest than from the Middle East. Let's make Minnesota the Saudi Arabia of Renewable Fuels. Next, if Minnesota is going to be a successful global competitor, our government needs to be more dynamic, more responsive, and more accountable to the people. When it comes to spending the people's money, we shouldn't be afraid of the people. Today, I'm proposing what I call "Turbocharged Truth in Taxation." When each Minnesota taxpayer receives their annual "Truth in Taxation Form" in the mail, there will be something else in that envelope: three postcards one each for the county, city or township, and school district - the postcards will be called the Taxpayer Satisfaction Survey. The postcard would enable taxpayers to mail in a "no" vote if they think a levy increase goes beyond a reasonable level. If significant dissatisfaction is registered, a levy referendum on the amount of increase above a certain level will be triggered. We've got to trust the people. So once again, I also ask the Legislature to pass a carefully drawn and limited form of Initiative and Referendum. We need to allow the people the chance to directly speak on the major issues of the day. 

There are many other issues facing Minnesota. Let me address just a few more. In my address last year, I spoke on the issue of gaming. My preference then is my preference now: to keep gaming within its existing contours, but to explore a better deal for all Minnesotans. My hope was that tribes with large casino gaming interests would make a fair payment to the state in exchange for being granted a monopoly and other benefits. It appears they're not interested in such an agreement. As a result, we're left to explore other alternatives. We'll have more to say about this in the coming weeks. I will note that we are pleased with our discussions with the Tribes in Northern Minnesota that represent 85 per cent of Native Americans in our state. We also have critical work to do to improve our public safety. Methamphetamine addiction is an epidemic, a crime wave and a social tragedy rolled into one. We need new BCA agents, new penalties, new jails, new treatment options and new cleanup standards to deal with this new and deadly drug. 

We also need to better track, convict and lock up sex offenders for as long as possible. I urge the passage of legislation that accomplishes this as soon as possible. In addition to public safety, we need to make progress in protecting and improving our beautiful natural resources. Our world leading quality of life depends in part, upon the enjoyment Minnesotans get from the great outdoors and our beautiful natural resources. My bonding proposal includes significant funding to improve the environment and our natural resources, including the next round of CREP funding. It's imperative that we secure funding for that initiative this year. We also urge the Legislature to pass our proposal to create a new Conservation Heritage Foundation and pass a Constitutional Amendment to further dedicate funding for natural resources and the environment. We all know that in a fast-changing, hypercompetitive world, we can't compete if we don't change. But change we must. Minnesota loves disproving those who say "it can't be done." Can't be done? 

Right here in Rochester, we have both the world's best hospital and the world's fastest computer - in a town of 85,000 people. Go figure. We have the highest graduation rates, the broadest health care access, and the greatest level of home ownership and workforce participation in the country. And we did it all with a small population in a cold state that coastal big shots refer to as "flyover land." Minnesota prides itself on overcoming that stereotype. We know that creating jobs, educating kids and the other important work of government, takes brains, guts, speed, leadership and action. So, what is the state of our state? The state of the state is good, but not good enough. So we'd better get to work. We need to get bold. We need to get together. We need to get moving. And we need to do it now. Join me and let's go!Not far from here is a Saint Paul city park called "Swede Hollow." For decades it was a disadvantaged area of the city. There were none of the normal comforts. Phalen Creek was their sewage system.
In the 1930s, the Sanchelli family lived there. They were new to America and they worked hard. The Dad in the family was Tony. He would come home after his shift and stand on the bridge over the creek. In a wonderful voice, he would sing out over the Hollow: "America the Beautiful." You know the words ... for spacious skies ... and amber waves of grain... God shed his grace on thee.
When moms would try to put their kids to bed, children wouldn't go to sleep until they'd heard Tony sing. The lesson is, that even back then, and even for folks like Tony who didn't have much, Minnesota has always been a land of great opportunity and beauty.
We here serve a caring, creative, and hard- working people. A state of innovators. Their energy and compassion are writing a beautiful new chapter in Minnesota's history.
Thank you all for your warm welcome and your enthusiastic spirit of service.
All elected officials have a challenging job. On behalf of all Minnesota, I'm grateful for your service, and for the sacrifices your families make that allow you to serve.
I particularly want to thank the four people who know me best... but love me anyway: my wife Mary, my daughters Anna and Mara, and especially my mother-in-law, Beulah Anderson. Thank you for your love and support.
Today the state of our state is strong, hopeful, and prosperous.
· Our people are working. 
· Our students are learning. 
· And our citizens are healthy.
Despite challenges all around us, our success abounds:
· We're America's healthiest state. 
· We have just about the lowest poverty rate in America. 
· We have one of the lowest unemployment rates in the country.



· We have the highest performing students. 
· We lead the nation in the percentage of our citizens who have health insurance. 
· And we're nationally recognized for our water, great outdoors, renewable energy,
and quality of life.

All of us who have been called to serve in this awesome building have a spectacular opportunity. Everyone of us comes to this place with ideas and a passion to make things better. Let's tum that potential into results and show the country how it's done.

While it hasn't always been pretty, we've accomplished a great deal together:

· We've completed the biggest financial turnaround in Minnesota history, going from a 4.5 billion dollar deficit to a billion dollar surplus.

· We regained our status as the nation's innovators in education by becoming the

first state to adopt performance pay for teachers.

· We tossed the Profile of Learning and instituted clear, relevant educational standards.

· We started to change high school so students can make better use of their time and earn college credit.

· We laid the groundwork for a world-class higher education institution in Rochester.


· We developed report cards so parents can evaluate schools and senior citizens can evaluate nursing homes.

· We delivered a zero percent increase in premiums for state employees in our award-winning Minnesota Advantage program, because labor and management worked together to control costs.

· We launched an historic partnership between the University of Minnesota and the Mayo Clinic to advance human health, genomics, and the biosciences.

· We fought back against meth dealers and sex offenders.

· We implemented the largest transportation funding package in modem history. I thank Lt. Governor Molnau for her strong leadership on this and so many other issues.

· We provided funding for the vital Northstar commuter rail line from Big Lake to Minneapolis, and I'm delighted that we've received final design approval from the federal government just yesterday.

· We created the JOB-Z program to bring thousands of needed jobs and millions in capital investment to greater Minnesota.

· We focused on the key role livestock producers play in our agriculture economy and are helping them to innovate for the future.

· We doubled our ethanol standard, increased wind power, and implemented America's first biodiesel requirement.

· We're reforming and streamlining state government through our "Drive to Excellence" effort. And it's producing results.



· And we were the first state in the nation to implement a program so our citizens can buy safe, affordable prescription medicine from Canada.
But there's more to do.
My goal as governor is to make Minnesota the best state in which to live, work, and raise a family.
But we can't succeed unless we prosper economically.
All of us crave security.
But in this viciously competitive world, there is no security without real prosperity. And there is no future prosperity without innovation.
Look at General Motors. Look at the airline industry. Look at the stagnant economies of Western Europe. They all made promises they can't keep because they can't back them up with real prosperity.
In a changing world, our future success depends on our ability to innovate. That's great news, because innovation is what Minnesota does best.
Let me tell you about what's happening in a really innovative town I've visited several times: Benson, Minnesota, population of about 3,300.
Anytime you create something everyone needs from something nobody wants, you're getting somewhere.
On one side of town, they're building an energy plant that creates electricity from turkey droppings. With over 46 million turkeys, Minnesota has a lot of droppings.
Nearby, they make over 45 million gallons of ethanol at the Chippewa Valley Ethanol Company.
To expand their operation, they started making vodka out of wheat and rye.
Now, in order to make their business more efficient, they're beginning to use biomass energy--burning com stalks and husks--to replace their use of natural gas.
They have another company in town called Future Products, which is using com to make everything from plastic containers to tee shirts.



Benson, Minnesota, a little town on the prairie, beat winning author Thomas Friedman to the punch. He says: America can win the coming global economic battle because America is "the world's dream machine."
Let's lift up Minnesota as America's dream machine, the nation's leader in innovation.
A few years back a couple of Minnesota brothers, Ron and Dan Shimek, dreamed of a new way to heat homes--a fireplace that had no chimney, that ran on gas. They built a prototype in their garage.
And the first time they flipped the switch, it blew up the living room. But they didn't give up. They tried again. Fifteen patents later, they were the largest maker of gas fireplaces in the world!
Minnesota is successful, but our future isn't guaranteed. We have to go out and win it in a hypercompetitive, global economy.
Nostalgia is not a strategic plan. And as Bill Gates says, "Success is a lousy teacher. It seduces smart people into thinking they can't lose." The challenges we face are big, different, real, and they are here.
One of our modem icons is the iPod. It entertains us with music and video. But it's a reflection of the world we live in now.
Technology today gives almost everybody access to almost everything, everywhere, at any time. It gives people previously unimaginable freedom and choice.
Government must do the same. We must innovate and offer our people a new level of freedom, choice, and opportunity. If we don't, government will become less effective. Or worse, a wet blanket on progress.
As we embark on this adventure, we should be inspired by the words of John Kennedy. He said, "Time and the world do not stand still. Change is the law of life. And those who look only to the past or the present are certain to miss the future."
Now, let's chart our course to the future.
Let's describe and declare the kind of Minnesota we want to live in a decade from now. It should be:
· A Minnesota whose education system is not only nation-leading, but worldleading, and we have the test scores to prove it.
· A Minnesota where healthcare is available and affordable to everyone with consumers in the driver's seat.

· A Minnesota that is the best place in America to start and grow innovative businesses and jobs.
· A Minnesota that is the safest place in the nation to live. · A Minnesota that has solved its racial disparities in education, housing, and
healthcare. · A Minnesota that has conquered chronic homelessness; doubled its use of
renewable energy; and has a modem, efficient, and energy-saving transportation system. · A Minnesota where water pollution only appears in the history books. · And... a Minnesota where the traditional family structure is revitalized and life is protected and respected.
All of these goals will require innovation. We can make progress towards some of these goals this year. Others will take longer.
We're great innovators because we're free to dream. The ultimate protectors of our freedom are the men and women who serve in the United States military.
However, we all know that freedom isn't free. But we also know that not everybody pays the same price. All pay something, some pay a little more, some pay a lot, and some...pay with the ultimate measure of their service.
In six days, I'll be traveling to Camp Shelby, Mississippi, to say thanks and farewell for now to 2,600 Minnesotans who will be shipping out to Iraq. Some of those soldiers are watching us today via the internet. Let's look at the camera at the back of the chamber and give them our best wishes for a safe and successful mission.
I'd also like to recognize three people to whom we owe a debt of gratitude and who symbolize the selfless service of our military:
Merilee and Daniel Carlson lost their son Michael in Iraq last year. One of our own here in the Capitol endures the same grief, and carries the same burden of sacrifice. Senator Becky Lourey lost her son Matthew in Iraq last May.
Please join me in showing our appreciation for the tremendous sacrifice of the Loureys, Carlsons, others who have been lost, all the men and women who proudly wear the uniform, and their families.
We need to give them more than our applause. I've put forward a package of proposals to further support members of. our military and veterans. It includes an income tax exemption for military retirement pay and other assistance programs.
Please pass this legislation as soon as possible.



Now, to the other work that lies before us in this short, non-budget session.
There are four things that will make the biggest difference in creating Minnesota's future: education, healthcare, natural resources, and growing jobs.
Education made Minnesota what it is today, and education will make us what we will become tomorrow.
I read about a new Saint Paul school teacher the other day. She walked into her classroom and found that there were great needs. She realized her students spoke five different languages. Her name--Harriet Bishop, Minnesota's first school teacher. The year: 1847. She overcame great difficulties and succeeded. We honor her as the founder of Minnesota education. She rose to the challenges of her time. Let's rise to the challenges of our time.
I ask that you pass the early childhood education initiatives I announced this week to help make sure our youngest get a better start in the education race.
We also need to make sure that more of our resources get where they matter most. Let's require that at least 70 percent of school funding actually reaches the classroom.
We also need to realize that science and math are the currency of our new economy. We need more rigor in these areas.
We should upgrade our school standards to require Algebra One by eighth grade and Algebra Two and Chemistry to graduate from high school.
And while we're at it, let's bring a lesson from the game room into the classroom, by including digital literacy as part of our school standards so that our kids know how to access and use technology as a basic skill.
Advanced Placement and International Baccalaureate programs provide the rigor and relevance we need to prepare our students for the future. But they're not available to most of them.
I'm proposing that we provide seven million dollars in financial incentives for at least ten pioneering districts to use AP or IB for all students, in all grades.
In addition, we need to transform our high schools so we are better preparing our young people for the economy of the future. Academic progress in our secondary schools has flattened out.



Let's provide funding so up to five pioneering high schools can show the way by fundamentally overhauling their structure to focus on college preparedness or technical training that is relevant and rigorous for all students.
And if we want to further capitalize on the vastly growing Chinese market, more of us will need to speak their language. I'm directing the Department of Education to develop model Chinese language curriculum so it's available to every school district.
Success for Minnesota in a global economy also demands that we develop the potential of all our citizens. Disparities in graduation rates and academic performance between white students and students of color continue to be a moral, social, and economic crisis.
But, there are rays of hope.
Andersen Open, a K-8 school in the Phillips Neighborhood of Minneapolis, is an example of a school that is beating the odds through innovation, hard work, and high expectations for everybody.
Ninety-three percent of the students at Anderson Open are disadvantaged and 53 percent come from homes where English is not the first language. Last year, the school joined the Teacher Advancement Program and it's now part of Q Compo.
Teachers are paid for performance, meaningful professional development is provided for staff, and rigorous evaluation of instruction is conducted.
The results are remarkable. In just over one year, the students have improved on every measurement. The number of students passing the Basic Skills Test went from 38 percent to 62 percent!
This is possible because of the strong teaching staff and the strong leadership of the school's principal, Mark Bonine. Mark's message is clear: He sets high expectations for all students and all teachers.
Let's thank Mark, who is with us today, his staff, and all of Minnesota's great educators for their hard work and dedication.
While progress is being made, we can do more.
I've proposed school choice as an alternative for poor, failing or disabled children. The legislature should pass school choice as an alternative for at least our most disadvantaged students.
In the meantime, we should pursue other new and innovative approaches that produce results, such as the The Knowledge is Power Program, or KIPP schools.



These are rigorous, public, college prep schools where disadvantaged students develop the knowledge, skills, and character needed to succeed in top quality high schools, colleges, and the competitive world beyond.
I'm directing our Department of Education to seek out and authorize KIPP charter schools in Minnesota, focusing on areas where our needs are the greatest.
In addition to improving our education system, our future success also depends on innovating and improving our healthcare system.
People currently excluded from health insurance tend to be the working poor.
Basic health insurance is available for less than 200 dollars per month. We need to direct our HMOs and insurance companies to raise awareness and get more uninsured people to use these plans. We may also need to consider incentives or requirements for uninsured citizens to have health insurance coverage.
Let's also measure and pay for better healthcare outcomes. What gets measured and paid for, gets done.
We can start by focusing on chronic conditions like childhood obesity and diabetes, which are significant problems in our society.
There are clear best practice measurements for treating these diseases that will save lives and save money. We should begin to reward providers for meeting these performance measurements right away.
Today I'm directing the Department of Employee Relations to incorporate "pay for performance" into the state's health plan and will ask the Legislature to expand this approach to all public programs.
We must also control other healthcare costs. Every business can tell you how much they charge for their service. Healthcare providers should be able to do the same.
Last year, we required some healthcare providers to supply some cost information. Now it's time to require it from all providers and for more procedures.
We must also focus on reducing administrative costs in healthcare.
Say your grandma goes to a new doctor. They hand her that annoying, long form, with all the questions she's had to answer ten other times in ten other offices. The doctor asks her what medicines she takes, and all of us have trouble remembering the names and the dosages. Maybe the physicians can't treat her until her medical file has been transferred

from across town. And then the providers, patients, and the insurers engage in a paper war over what to pay for.
In the meantime, grandma's mailbox fills up with paper that says, "THIS IS NOT A BILL."
We need to help healthcare administration enter the 21 st century. We need electronic medical records.
I am proposing a 12 million dollar program to help small healthcare providers make the transition to an interconnected electronic medical record system so that medical errors are reduced and healthcare is improved. Today I am also challenging the providers and healthcare plans to match this amount so we can make progress more quickly.
Finally on the issue of health, Minnesota is recognized for our public health and emergency response systems. But as we face the threat of a worldwide bird flu pandemic, we need to be even better prepared. I propose we bolster our efforts with an immediate ten million dollar infusion of funds to further strengthen our defenses against this threat.
While we work on the health of our people, we must also work on the health of our natural resources. They help define our quality of life in this beautiful state.
The threat to our natural resources is growing faster than our ability to protect them.
But to do so properly, we need a plan. I am grateful for the recent efforts to reform the governance of the great outdoors and the use of the Environmental Trust Fund. Please pass these reforms this year. But let's also take the next step, and fund the development of a long-term, statewide strategic plan for conservation.
I also urge you to pass a Constitutional Amendment to dedicate funding for conservation and clean water. Don't water it down, don't make it too broad. Just pass it.
In the land ofl0,000 lakes, water matters a lot to all of us. Too many of our lakes are in trouble and they need our help.
So while we're waiting for the Constitutional Amendment to pass, let's make a 20 million dollar investment, right now, for Clean Water Legacy funding.
I also urge you to approve my bonding request for 200 million dollars for conservation, the outdoors, and parks.
Likewise, let's pass my proposal to achieve a 90 percent reduction of mercury emissions to keep the air and water clean for our kids.



We can also help our environment, and gain economic advantage, by leading further . . innovation in renewable energy. The world demand for fossil fuels is exploding but the supply is flat. That's a big problem, which needs to be addressed.
Let's face it. Washington has been slow to lead on this issue. But we can't afford to wait for them. Let's lead the way and set a strategic goal of "25-by-25"--so that 25 percent of all types of our energy will corne from renewable sources by 2025.
To accomplish this goal, we need to make big progress with our cars.
In Brazil, cars run on fuel with 20 to 100 percent ethanol. Yet, U.S. automakers say they can't provide us with these cars because there are not enough ethanol pumps to service them.
Let's fix that.
Currently, most gas stations offer three octane levels. It's time we change one of those to E85.
In 2004, I signed an executive order that requires the state to purchase renewable fuel vehicles. Today, I've signed an executive order to require state employees to actually use E85 in our state vehicles.
Many of the proposals I've outlined in education, healthcare, and natural resources will take money.
But adding unnecessary economic burdens won't help.
In the Boeing assembly plant, while they're building the planes, they hang big, yellow weights on the wings until the engines arrive. On the weights is written: 8,000 POUNDS. REMOVE BEFORE FLIGHT. If we expect our economy to fly, we need to remove some of the weight we hang on it.
In a hyper-competitive economy, raising taxes is a bad strategy, especially in an already highly-taxed state.
Fortunately, we don't need to raise taxes. Our strong economy has generated double digit revenue increases this biennium. The best way to generate revenue is to keep our job providers growing.
In strategic ways, we must reduce the burdens that government places on job providers and taxpayers in order to spur economic growth.

So, in this short session, let's focus on a fe';V key priorities in this area.
Let's put a cap on property taxes.
Let's accelerate the move toward a single sales factor corporate tax so we don't punish job creation and plant expansion in Minnesota.
Let's encourage our dairy producers to innovate by passing a dairy investment tax credit.
And here's a no-brainer: Let's eliminate the marriage penalty in our tax code.
One of the most important roles of government is to protect its citizens. Sometimes that means protecting them from their own government. I urge us to corne together to pass meaningful and responsible reforms to Minnesota's eminent domain laws.
Finally, let's not be afraid to debate and take action on issues which make some in this building nervous, but that are supported by most Minnesotans.
Let's walk the walk and hold ourselves more accountable by passing performance pay for politicians.
Let's encourage and welcome legal immigration, but make sure we're not looking the other way on immigration that's illegal.
And let's make sure that courts can't throw out our defense of marriage laws in Minnesota, like they have in other states. Let's define marriage in our Constitution as being between a man and a woman.
We shouldn't be afraid of rational and robust debates about these issues. This building was built for just such debates and the foundation and the walls are strong.
One of Minnesota's most recognizable symbols is the Split Rock Light House on the North Shore of Lake Superior. It was built a hundred years ago to help ships find their way to safety on the world's biggest, and most unpredictable lake.
Minnesota is and always has been a "lighthouse" state. We are a beacon of hope, optimism, and the innovative spirit to get things done.
Harriet Bishop was a lighthouse, bringing education to the frontier.
Dred Scott, a one-time Minnesota resident, was a lighthouse of freedom for those forced to be slaves.
Sister Kenney was a lighthouse of healing for the victims of polio.


Norman Borlaug was a lighthouse, finding new ways to feed the world.
Minnesota's corn growers, who began the ethanol revolution, were a lighthouse--showing the way to a better energy future.
The Mayo Clinic is a lighthouse of medicine, shining its beacon across the whole world.
And in his own way, as a ball player, Kirby Puckett was a lighthouse, showing that passion could defy gravity... with a smile.
A lighthouse works "because it rises above the circumstances to do its job and shines its light a long, long way off.
I want this historic building to be a lighthouse again. For that to happen... we all need to rise above the circumstances of politics and personality and look to the future.
John Kennedy put it best when he said, "In the final analysis, our most basic, common link is that we all inhabit this small planet. We all breathe the same air. We all cherish our children's future. And we are all mortal"
He's describing us.
Years from now, the configuration of politics and personalities currently in this place will matter little.
What will matter is how we lived, how we served, and how we made things better.
May God open our eyes to our common purpose, guide our service in this time and place, and continue to richly bless all the people of Minnesota.
Thank you all.Thank you. Well this is now my fifth State of the State address. I never really thought I had that much to say. In all the years I spent in this chamber, I sometimes saw Mr. Lincoln looking down on us and wondered what he might have thought.
I think he might say that politics and politicians aren't too popular these days and our first job is to work together to reestablish the people's trust in our government.
In response to political criticism, Lincoln once said this, "If I were two-faced, why would I be wearing this one?"
The face of state government needs to be trustworthy and open.
We serve in this beautiful and historic building, by the people's choice, to do their work with a spirit of humility, service, and gratitude.
Minnesota is incredibly blessed in every way. They say that gratitude makes way for more blessing.

So, let's begin by expressing our gratitude for those who carry the heaviest load for our nation and state.
During the past four years, the First Lady, who is with us today, and I have had a chance to spend a great deal of time with members of our military and their families. We have seen their uncommon courage and extraordinary dedication. These brave men and women come from all over our great state,' and they are inspiring examples of duty and honor.
The First Lady and I went to Kosovo a few years ago to visit the many troops from Minnesota National Guard who are serving there to keep the peace. While we were there, we met Sergeant Mark Gaulke. Mark served in the military for 28 years before retiring in 2005.

Mark is with us in the gallery and he's holding a picture of his daughter, Jessica. She is a student at Augsburg and is currently on her honeymoon, otherwise I'm sure she'd want to be with us today. Jessica just stepped down as Minneapolis Aquatennial Queen of the Lakes, but not because of her wedding. She stepped down because she will be deploying soon with her National Guard unit for a tour of duty in Iraq.
Members of the United States military deserve our deepest appreciation. Join me in thanking Sergeant Mark Gaulke, Specialist Jessica Gaulke and all the men and women of our military, their families, and our veterans.
The news last week that 2,600 members of the Minnesota National Guard will have their tours in Iraq extended hit our

military families and their communities really hard. It frustrates and disappoints all of us. But I know the quality of these people: They will continue to do their duty with excellence.
The burden under which they are serving today strains ·even their steely and selfless commitment.
We need to do our duty by supporting them and all members of the military with our words and our deeds. We need a surge of support for our military families, and we need it now.
I'm calling on every Minnesotan to find a way to express support for these outstanding Americans. Here are just a few ways that you can help: Buy a "Support Our Troops" license plate. Help an organization geared towards assisting the military or veterans. Go on the Governor's web page and sign up for the First Lady's Military Family Care Initiative. Donate money to the Minnesota Military Family Foundation or the Minnesotans' Military Appreciation Fund. Attend an event like a deployment or welcome home ceremony to show your support. Pick up the tab at a restaurant for one of these heroes or their families. If you see them around town, stick out your hand, shake their hand, look them in .the eye, and give them heartfelt thanks from a fellow Minnesotan.
I proposed a veterans and military package along with· Senator Vickerman, Representative Haws, Representative Severson, and others. It includes a tax exemption for military pension benefits, a Minnesota GI bill for college expenses, which I look forward to working with the Attorney

General on, she has a similar proposal, it also has full funding for the National Guard's budget requests, and. dramatic increases for Minnesota's veterans programs.
Please pass it; we owe it to these great heroes.

One of the privileges of serving here is being able to work in this amazing bUilding.
Cass Gilbert and all those who designed the Capitol left us a message.
They put a sculpture on top of the Capitol called "The Progress of the State," or the Quadriga.
In the sculpture, a person rides a chariot carrying a banner that says "Minnesota." Now, the golden guy in the chariot is not Joe Mauer, he's called "Prosperity." I think here is the lesson:
The progress of our state depends on prosperity, but it also depends on all of us working together.
In the statue, two strong women are out front leading and guiding the four golden horses. Like these leaders, Democrats and Republicans need to work together to guide our state in a common direction. We have plenty of powers here, that's not the problem: The key is pulling at the same speed, in the same direction - all in the name of progress and prosperity for the citizens we serve.

The state of our state is great, but we can make Minnesota even better.

There are many important things we need to do to advance

prosperity and prepare Minnesota for the future this session,

such things as improving our transportation system,

enhancing public safety, continuing to support agriculture

and our natural resource-based industries, maintaining a

pro-job business climate and stimulating rural economic

development.

'

But in the short time we have today,' I want to focus our common efforts to steer four big "horses" that will have a very large role in powering Minnesota's prosperity and progress.

They are these:

· Better Government · Better Energy · Better Education, and · Better Health Care


Government provides important services and has an important role to play. But we need to be careful, so that our desire to do well through government doesn't slowly suffocate and stifle one of our key advantages: the unprecedented freedoms and liberties we possess and the personal responsibility that comes with it.


This building is filled with ideas, philosophies and agendas that call for government to do more, and more and more. That inevitably leads to demands for more taxes, more regulation, and more bureaucracy.
A key measure of good government is this: Do the taxpayers get good value for the money they pay? During the past four years, we've made some great progress on this front. Let me give you just one example.
Brenda Willard is a manager in our Administration Department. She and her colleagues helped develop purchasing standards and policies for state computers, cell phones, and furniture that will save the state over $22 million. That's the combined annual tax bill for 1,100 Minnesota families! Brenda is with us in the gallery today. Let's thank her and all of her colleagues and team members for their great work.
When my budget is released next week, you will see a key theme: 'Minnesota government should stop paying for good intentions and start paying for better performance.
I'll be more likely to reach for the signing pen, rather than the veto stamp, if the bill on my desk clearly defines expected results. It should also have clear measurements for those results and link spending to performance, rather than just wishful thinking.
We owe that to the hard-working taxpayers of this state.

And just like Minnesota families, state government needs to live within its means. We just climbed out of an epic budget hole, and we're not going to spend our way back into one!
Under the November budget forecast, state spending will go up about $1 billion automatically because we'll be serving more people under our entitlement programs. Beyond that, an additional $2 billion is available for use. That means the state can use about $3 billion in the upcoming budget cycle.
That would be about a 10 percent increase over the current
budget. Ten percent growth is more than most Minnesotans will see in their paychecks and it should be enough growth for their government, too.
I've said it before and I'll say it again - Minnesotans are not undertaxed.
We should lessen their burden by cutting taxes. Thanks for your efforts to pass the bill which provides tax relief for college tuition and other education costs. I urge you to pass additi08al tax-cutting legislation this session that provides property tax relief, tax relief for veterans, and other tax cuts that will strategically help our economy.
I also continue to urge you to cap property taxes by placing a limit on how much any local unit of government can . increase property taxes without voter approval. Now some have opposed this idea by citing the need for "local control." That's understandable, I've heard those concerns and today I offer a compromise by proposing to exempt any local unit
..
of government from this requirement if they get less than a third of their general fund revenues from the state.

But being fiscally responsible is not our only duty. We need to aggressively prepare for the future in other ways.

Renewable energy is an important part of Minnesota's future.
Our great nation's sad addiction to foreign oil exposes the country to a reckless amount of economic and national security risk.
Even worse, as with many addicts, we are buying from some of the very people who, in many cases, want to hurt us.
Our nation has been asleep at the switch on energy policy for decades. The good news is that while much of the country has just begun to hear the energy wake-up call, Minnesota has been an early riser. While others slept in on renewable energy, we got up early, we made the coffee, we cooked the breakfast, we read the paper, we did some chores and we took the dog for a walk.
An example of our renewable energy leadership is Mark Willers, who is with us today in the gallery. Mark and his family have a farm near Luverne. He is also on the board of a farmer-owned ethanol co-op and he heads up a local wind energy company.
Mark represents the visionary farmers who didn't wait for the future to happen to them. Let's thank Mark and all of our Minnesota energy pioneers for their great work that got us to this point.

Minnesota has great renewable energy policies. Now let's show the nation how to move even more boldly towardS energy independence.
I strongly urge you to consider my "Next Generation Energy Plan," add your own good ideas, and let's pass a comprehensive renewable energy plan as soon as possible.
That plan will help us move away from fossil fuels, and it will also help us clean up the environment and improve the environment. But we can do even more. Minnesota can't reverse global climate change by ourselves, but we can do our part and help lead the way. Our energy plan will significantly reduce the amount of carbon we put into the atmosphere.
I look forward to working with the Democrats and the Republicans to pass and sign comprehensive historic renewable energy legislation this session.
While we're talking about improving our environment, there's another step that needs to take place and I hope we'll take it this session - and that's finally passing a constitutional amendment to dedicate funding for the outdoors and conservation. We've come close in past years, but our environment can't wait anymore. I continue to support this important effort and urge you to do so as well.


Another fundamental key to making Minnesota better socially and economically is the urgent need to make our schools even better.
Now, you all know that Minnesota is at or near the top in most measures of student performance. Nearly every state would love to have our school performance results.
We're blessed with fantastic educators, engaged parents and, of course, we have above average students.
But nation-leading in student performance isn't good enough anymore. Our students need to be world-leading, not just nation-leading.

In any discussion, though, regarding education, the debate about the level of funding consumes most of the oxygen in the room. Very little time gets actually spent on the reforms needed to modernize our education system. So, let me address funding right up-front.
My budget next week will propose an increase of up to four percent per year for our schools for general purposes, plus increases in many special aspects of education funding as well.
But we're not just going to pay for good intentions anymore. We're going to pay for better performance as part of a new "Successful Schools" initiative.

Every district will get a general formula increase. of two percent in each of the next two years. Each school will also be eligible to receive an additional two percent per year as a performance bonus if the school achieves or maintains at least a three-star rating in reading and math on their Minnesota school Report Card. That's not a particularly high bar.
My budget will include $150' million for the bonus portion of this "Successful Schools" initiative. We need to pay for performance and quit enabling schools that don't meet our expectations.

Another hard reality we must face is this: American high schools are obsolete in their current form.
One of the most forward thinkers of our time, Bill Gates, said this: "", our high schools - even when they're working exactly as designed - cannot teach our kids what they need to know today. Training the workforce of tomorrow 'with the high schools of today is like trying to teach kids about computers on a 50-year-old mainframe. It's the wrong tool for the times." Close quote.
U.S. students score near the top on international test scores in 4th grade, but by 8th grade our students are about in the middle of the pack and by the end of high'school they are near the bottom.

Too many of our high school students today are engaged in academic loitering for much of their high school career. In too many cases, our high school students are bored, checked-out, coasting, not even vaguely aware of their posthigh school plans, if they have any, and they are just marking time.
It's costing us a lot of money and it's costing them their future. This is a silent crisis and has the potential to devastate our future prosperity if we don't fix it.
We made some good strides last year, and in proceeding years, but much more needs to be done. Let's make Minnesota the number one state in the nation for reforming high schools by creating "3R" high schools. The three Rs here stand for rigor, relevance, and results.
My budget next week will include $75 million in funding to encourage high schools to become "3R" schools. This is also a pay for performance deal. They will be required to do a lot. First:
(1) 3R schools will be required to implement rigorous and relevant courses for all students, including career and technical courses in high-demand fields.
(2) 3R schools must provide access for all students to programs that provide college credit opportunities.
(3) In 3R schools, every student, every student, must complete a full year of college while in high school.
(4) And in 3R schools they must provide opportunities for students to pursue work-based learning and internships.

We hope that every high school will become a 3R high school. But even if they choose not to, the program will be optional, all high schools will still be required to make other changes.
So, our budget will provide additional funding for more schools to provide AP or IB programming for all students in all grade levels.
My budget will also provide funding to transform more schools so they focus on science, technology, engineering, and math. We will also be asking the Legislature to take three additional steps this year: (1) adopt new, more rigorous math standards for all our students; (2) require an individual graduation plan for 8th graders and above that
parents will need to sign each year; and (3) require that all
students complete four years of a second language in order to graduate from high school.
Now, this may all seem like a big leap, but the bar is very high. I urge you to pass significant high school reform this session.

But we also need to change and modernize the way we deliver instruction.
I was told the other day that a majority of teenagers now spend up to 50 percent of their waking hours interacting with a device: televisions, iPods, YouTube, e-mail, text messaging, the Internet, cell phones, video ga"mes, digital cameras, and the list goes on and on and grows by the day.

I was with my daughters just the other day at a mall in Eagan and they noticed a cell phone store next to the place we were going into. They begged and pleaded with me to go into the store just to look at some of the new phones, even thought they knew we weren't' going to be buying one.
Now as you all know, the cell phones of today are not just phones. They're much more, both technologically and socially. I said okay, and they ran ahead of me and into the store with great excitement and glee. When I entered a moment later, they were standing in frozen awe with their mouths open in front of the display containing a "Sidekick III with illuminating features."
It took me a moment to bring them out of what appeared to be some sort of technology-induced trance or coma. Then, I burst their bubble. I told them that Apple had just come out with a new phone and that its makers believe it will leapfrog all other phones and hand-held technology on the market. I jokingly told my kids they had already fallen behind. They were stunned but we spent the next ten minutes talking about the all about the capabilities of the new Apple iPhone. And this is not uncommon for kids if this generation...
Learning and interaction for today's children is profoundly, profoundly different than even a short time ago. In many ways, they communicate, they socialize, and act differently because of technology.
Our education system is behind the times and out of sync with this new reality. Our primary method of instruction is to have adults with dry erase markers lecturing to often

bored students who carry home backpacks so full of paper they look like they could be training to join Will Steger on an Arctic expedition.
We need to move Minnesota into the modern age by making things like more on-line learning opportunities available to
our students. If done well, these courses can open world-
class instruction in almost any subject to every student in all corners of our state.
To get us there, though, my budget will provide funding to enhance current on-line opportunities, as well as remove the financial barriers for districts wanting to purchase online course work.

All of these initiatives will help students be academically better prepared to go beyond high school. But we also need to do more to get them and their families more financially prepared to go to college.
Last summer, I announced my ACHIEVE proposal to provide two free years of college in Minnesota for top performing students. I continue to think that proposal is a good idea, and urge you to pass it. ACHIEVE provides a powerful incentive for students to study hard throughout their high school career and it increases the likelihood that our most talented students will stay in Minnesota at a time when competition for top talent is more fierce than ever.

I have heard the concerns about this proposal from those who feel ACHIEVE is too focused and too heavily weighted on just top performing students.
So, in the spirit of compromise, I offer you an alternative proposal, I'll call it ACHIEVE II which addresses both preparing for and paying for college. Under this proposal, high school students who take rigorous college level courses while in high school can earn college credit and receive a scholarship that they will be able to use at any college or university in Minnesota. If a student finishes a year of college in high school, they will receive enough money under the scholarship to pay for an average year's tuition and fees at a Minnesota public university regardless of their class rank and regardless of their ACT scores. So it will be open and serve many more students than the original ACHIEVE proposal. This will result in students who take a year of college in high school, they will get at least a free year of college, and the program will benefit many, many students.

We also need to make sure, though, that education funding as possible reaches the classroom where it matters most. So I again encourage you to pass my proposal requiring that at least 70 percent of the money get into the classroom. We can improve our children's future by improving our education system by driving resources and money into the classroom.

We also need to improve our higher education system. My budget will contain substantial increases for our colleges,

universities and tuition aid programs. For the first time, it will also contain $50 million in performance bonuses for higher education institutions that achieve clearly defined and obtained strategic goals.

It's also clear that we need to do more to help our youngest learners. They need to be better prepared for kindergarten and the school years beyond. The payoff can be well worth the investment. There have been a number of early childhood ideas already discussed during the opening weeks of this legislative session.
One of those ideas is all-day kindergarten. I believe all-day K has merit, but it is enormously expensive if it is required for all kids statewide. Its price tag is $320 million and it would not be targeted to the kids who need it the most. The truth is that children from advantaged backgrounds don't generally have an elementary academic performance problem. In an era of limited resources and seemingly limitless needs, we need to focus and prioritize our efforts and our money.
With all of that in, mind, I'm proposing an early childhood scholarship program to provide up to $4,000 per child for at-risk students to attend a certified kindergarten readiness program of their choice. This will get help to the kids who need it most and, hopefully, it will help close the achievement gap, which we need to work on more. We've made progress, but not nearly enough and not nearly fast enough.

As you can see, we have much work to do in education.
Let's not allow our nostalgia to limit our children's future.
We owe our children their own future, not our past.

We have other large challenges and opportunities in front of us. One of them is the need to fix our broken health care system. We have a historic opportunity to accomplish real reform. Let's take the journey together by passing my Minnesota Health Connections plan.
Expanding access to health insurance is a priority. But expanding access to a broken system is not a complete solution. We need to have a comprehensive approach that simultaneously focuses on improving access, improving quality, and lowering cost.
Let me start with access. We 'have a goal that all Minnesotans should be covered by health insurance. This does not mean a single-payer; it doesn't necessarily mean or shouldn't mean that the government takes over the system and pays for all of that coverage. There are many ways to achieve that goal. While we expand access, we also need to fix the underlying system and make sure that our efforts are financially sustainable.
Under current law, without anybody casting a vote, without anyone doing anything, under current law, access to our state-subsidized health care programs will expand to cover

an additional 45,000 Minnesotans this biennium. But we need to do more than that, our first installment for additional access should consist of expanding coverage to all children under age 21, not just 18, with a household income of $60,000 or less for a family of four.
But we also have to focus on cost containment. Unfortunately, providers and consumers in the current system have little motivation to contain costs. '
But market forces can help reduce cost and improve quality. Let me give you an example.
Lasik surgery was introduced about ten years ago. It was priced about $5,000 per eye and only available in limited locations. After ten years of price and quality wars in a real marketplace, the price has come down to about $500 an eye, quality has improved, and access has grown dramatically.
So while market approaches may not work for all medical procedures, we know that engaged, motivated consumers are a powerful force in controlling cost, especially when price and quality measurements are easily understood.
As the private market begins to change and implement cost containment strategies, we should study them and apply the best of them, what is working, and apply it to our public, programs. I propose MinnesotaCare II, which will take the framework of MinnesotaCare and modernize it to introduce consumer choice and competition so that MinnesotaCare consumers can obtain the benefit of lower premiums along with incentives for making healthy choices.

We will also reduce costs by creating the Minnesota Health Insurance Exchange, to allow uninsured individuals access to . health insurance that will lower premium costs by roughly 30 percent.
The Insurance Exchange will also absorb administrative costs for small businesses purchasing insurance and give the employees access to a greater array of insurance products.
Finally, comprehensive reform this year should also move Minnesota toward an interoperable electronic medical records system; overhaul our mental health system; streamline, thank you thank you Representative Greiling, Minnesota's billing and coding systems into a single operation; and advance efforts to pay for better health rather than just procedures provided.


As we finish here today, I am reminded of a story about a man of great intellect and great perspective.
David McCullough is one of the premier historians of our time. He's. taught us a lot about John Adams, Harry Truman, Teddy Roosevelt, the founding of our nation, and some of the most critical moments in our history.
I heard he recently made a presentation to a very distinguished audience. In the question and answer period, someone asked him which period in American history was most important. He thought for a moment and his simple answer was, "This one, right now."

Looking back is interesting and helpful. But we have to embrace the importance of "right now." We don't have certainty about what lies ahead for our economy, our national security, or our society. But we do know that the people of Minnesota have chosen the folks in this room to work together and to do our very best to make decisions that lead us towards a better Minnesota and a prosperity for all our citizens. Our state is filled with wonderful people. Minnesotans are kind, they're generous, hard-working, and they are born innovators. They will certainly do their part if we do ours. Together, let's focus on the future and boldly lead, right now. Thank you very much. May God bless each of you and may God bless the great state of Minnesota.More than 80 years ago, a young man from Central Minnesota made an historic journey, alone, in an airplane across the Atlantic.
When Charles Lindbergh emerged from the plane, he said just what you might expect a Minnesotan to say, "Well ... I made it." This year marks our wonderful state's lS0th birthday. For this occasion, we can set aside a bit of our usual Minnesota modesty and look back with pride on what we've accomplished together.
Our economy has successfully grown and evolved. We do everything from feeding the world to exploring the wonders of cyberspace.
We've been enriched by the presence of different cultures. We mix together, appreciating how our differences contribute to a richer Minnesota.
We've faced floods, fires, tornadoes, and wars, and we've overcome.
We've produced great people: Norman Borlaug and Sister Kenny; Seymour Cray and Earl Bakken. This special place raised Judy Garland, Prince, and Bob Dylan; John Madden, Vern Gagne, and Charles Bender; Hubert Humphrey, Herb Brooks, and Roy Wilkins, to name just a few.

Here in the Saint Cloud area, you have local favorites as well, including Alice Wheelock Whitney, Dave Durenberger, Jim Eisenreich, and Al Loehr.
On my block in South Saint Paul, it was the Bruggemans, Marshinkes, Daniches, Boljanoviches, Elsenpeters, and the Pokornys. They weren't famous, but they were pretty special, too.
I'm delighted to deliver this speech here in the "Granite City." Much of this area is built on solid rock. This area's values reflect the strength of our state and the goodness of our people.
Al Loehr is a hometown example of these qualities and values. Al was the son of a stone cutter. As a young man, Al went to work for the railroad. He went to war in the South Pacific as part of the greatest generation. He landed by ship in the port city of Hiroshima and witnessed the destruction of war.
Like many in his generation, he helped save the world and then came home and helped build his community. He returned to Saint Cloud and the railroad. He served as mayor here and led efforts to further improve this city.
He was a Minnesota Commissioner of Veterans Affairs and has given over 50 years of service to the cause of veterans. He is Minnesota bedrock, and we stand on his shoulders today. Join me in thanking a true Minnesotan, Al Loehr.

It's because of the hard work, dedication, and character of our people, that Minnesota is at or near the top in most quality of life measures.
We're number one in child well-being, home ownership and access to health insurance.
We're number one in voter turnout, Fortune 500 companies per capita, and production of medical devices.
We're number one in sugar beets, sweet corn, green peas, and turkeys.
We're number one in ACT scores, the percentage of adults with a high school diploma, and number two in the country in eighth grade math scores.
We're near the top in E-85 pumps, wind energy, renewable energy, and recycling.
We've been judged the most livable, the healthiest, the most generous, and the hardest working state in the nation.
Recently, the City of Saint Cloud won a Gold Medal as the most livable city in the world. Mayor Kleis, that's about as good as it gets. Congratulations to you and your fantastic city.
Our ambition as Minnesota leaders should be to make this state the best place in America - the best place in the world - to live, work, and raise a family.
In 2007, Minnesota faced a decade's worth of disasters in a year's time. Spring floods along our western border were followed by

massive forest fires near our northern border. Large portions of Minnesota, including Stearns County, experienced severe drought. In August, we faced the most difficult of challenges: the 1-35W bridge collapse and historic flooding across southeastern Minnesota.
But in the midst of trouble, our state and our nation saw the character and resolve of Minnesotans come shining through. Our prayers, concern, and support continue for those who suffered loss in those heartbreaking events.
Through it all, we saw the strength of Minnesotans.
As Governor, I've seen that strength many times.
I've seen it in the faces of brave military families.
I've seen it in the eyes of cold and tired flood victims absolutely committed to rebuild.
I saw it as a kid growing up In South Saint Paul, when families impacted by mass layoffs at the meat packing plants got back on their feet. I saw it in my own home when my Mom passed away and my Dad got laid off not long after.
And I've seen it in acts of uncommon heroism by regular people, like the 1-35W bridge construction worker who risked his own safety to pull people out of the river with only a broom handle.
Our state is strong even as we are challenged by circumstances.

Minnesotans are understandably concerned about a fragile economy, rising health care and energy costs, making ends meet, and government's never-ending claims on their pocketbooks.
But Minnesota is up to the challenge.
Minnesotans are smart. Minnesotans are creative. Minnesotans are strong.
We have work to do, so let's get started by putting first things first.
The burden of war has fallen hard on the members of our military and their families. In the last year, Minnesota welcomed home more than 3,000 soldiers. We also laid some of our heroes to rest. They gave us their all. Our words and our deeds need to honor their remarkable commitment, courage, and sacrifice.
We've worked together to support members of the military, their families, and veterans. I ask the Legislature to pass the military and veterans package I proposed in November.
Serving others gives life great meaning. We have with us today someone who has led a deeply meaningful life: Lieutenant Colonel John Morris, a chaplain in the Minnesota National Guard, who has spent a lifetime faithfully pastoring others.
He has also poured himself into welcoming soldiers all the way home by designing and leading Minnesota's reintegration effort. Our Beyond the Yellow Ribbon program has become the nation's foremost program for soldiers and their families, and we're so proud of its success.

We're very grateful to Chaplain Morris and deeply appreciate the great care and service he has provided to the men and women in our military. He personifies the meaning of commitment. Please join me in thanking Chaplain Morris.
Our efforts to create a brighter future for Minnesota should also focus on reducing our dependence on foreign oil and producing cleaner energy.
Minnesota should continue to lead efforts to "Americanize" energy production. We must help keep America from becoming an energy hostage to hostile and unreliable leaders like Hugo Chavez, Vladimir Putin, and Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. Homegrown energy will also grow green collar jobs in Minnesota and improve our environment.
This year, I'm asking the Legislature to approve up to 20 million dollars in revenue bonds to fund low interest loans for communities to encourage the installation of micro energy technologies such as home-based solar, next-generation windmills, geothermal heating, and other renewable energy sources .
We also want to maintain our status as the nation's bio-fuels champion. We were the first state in the nation to require that our gasoline contain ten percent ethanol, and we've passed a law to double that.
Four years ago, we harvested the ingenuity of Minnesota farmers and required that our diesel fuel contain two percent soybean oil.

We've improved the product and now let's increase the biodiesel requirement to 20 percent by 2015.
We should also take further steps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. But it's important that our efforts ensure jobs are not lost as a result and that Minnesota does not place itself at a competitive disadvantage.
Clean energy will help our environment and outdoors, and that is a good thing. Enjoying the outdoors is part of who we are as Minnesotans.
We have a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to make even more progress this year by acquiring one of the most breathtaking parcels of undeveloped land left in Minnesota. I propose we purchase 3,000 acres of land along the shores of Lake Vermilion and dedicate it as our first new major state park in 40 years.
I strongly urge the Legislature to seize this historic opportunity to do permanent good.
Some are concerned about funding for this purchase. The Environmental Trust Fund is the ideal funding source. It has a healthy balance and using it will not put further strain on our general fund.
On the broader issue of the general fund, we know the fragile economy is one of the largest challenges facing our citizens.
The economy has slowed down and government's tax collections are now lower than previously projected. Our state budget is in

serious deficit. That deficit will almost certainly be much worse when the new budget forecast is released in a couple of weeks.
As we tackle the deficit, we must remember that Minnesota's hardworking families are already squeezed enough. They're paying more for gas, food, and health care. The last thing they need is government rummaging around in their pockets looking for more. Government must learn to live within its means. We should not add to the burden on Minnesota families by raising their taxes.
Moreover, the well-being of the people we serve depends on their ability to have good-paying jobs. That, in turn, depends upon the willingness of companies to invest, stay, and grow in Minnesota. However, Minnesota's tax policies, job climate, and large government discourage economic growth.
We need to reduce taxes and regulations that discourage job growth, income generation, investment, entrepreneurial activity, . research, and exports. We'll need to do that in a manner that also leaves us with a stable state budget.
Our current tax system reflects the economy and demographics of the 1960s. It's outdated and needs to be fixed.
So I'm announcing that I will create the 21st Century Tax Reform Commission that will recommend tax reforms for our 21st century economy.
Unlike the State Budget Trends Study group that is already underway, this commission will specifically focus on improving

our job climate by reforming Minnesota's tax laws. Job providers, entrepreneurs, private sector employees, investors, and others who actually have direct experience in creating private sector jobs will be members of this commission.
In the meantime, I still have an important tool to restrain taxes and spending. I call it the taxpayer protection pen, otherwise known as the veto pen.
As you know, I will not hesitate to use it to stop government from digging into your wallets.
We should also protect homeowners from unreasonable property tax increases. So once again, I call for Minnesota to join the many states that have capped property taxes.
We also need to support entrepreneurs and small businesses because they are so vitally important to our economy. They create the vast majority of new jobs. That's why I'm asking the Legislature to approve my Strategic Entrepreneurial Economic Development, or "SEED" initiative.
SEED will help new business startups and grow new jobs across Greater Minnesota.
. We must also support our cornerstone industries. Two leading examples are agriculture and mining.
Today, one in five Minnesota jobs are related to agriculture, food processing, agribusiness, or related industries. Minnesota can't be a successful state unless our farmers and agricultural sector is stable and growing.

Commodity prices are pretty good overall and, after some tough . years, our livestock sector is showing some signs of resurgence.
I'm very happy to be the governor of a state with 13,000 more dairy cows than just a few years ago. The state's dairy industry is producing more milk and receiving better prices.
But we can do more.
With fewer and fewer Minnesotans having a direct family connection to the farm, it's important that policymakers take the time to appreciate and promote agriculture in Minnesota, no matter what part of the state we're from.
We can also provide more direct support to farmers in a variety of ways. One way is to continue to support bio-fuels and other forms of farm-grown energy.
Most importantly, we need to help our farmers by doing all we can to keep their input costs such as energy, fuel, regulations, and taxes, as low as possible.
Our mining sector, after a long history of highs and lows, has also rebounded well. The dramatic need for steel in Asia has raised the worldwide demand and price for taconite. That has made Minnesota's mining assets much more valuable. The reinvestment in Minnesota's taconite mines and the resulting increase in jobs and economic activity is terrific.
More companies are planning to bring more jobs to continue this "Iron Range Renaissance." More private investment is taking
place now on the Range than in decades. I look forward to making these projects a reality.
We all agree our future depends upon a modern and efficient transportation system.
We've made strides in this area, including investing more in roads over the last five years than ever before and developing the Northstar rail that we hope will eventually reach Saint Cloud.
Just a few weeks ago, I announced my bonding proposal that includes four times more funding for local roads and bridges than ever before.
I would caution legislators not to delete this important funding from the bill to insert less important projects.
Strong differences of opinion exist regarding transportation funding. But we all agree on one thing - we cannot continue the stalemate that has existed for three decades. I remain hopeful we can overcome the politics and rhetoric of this debate and pass a bipartisan transportation bill this session.
An area of great promise this session is health care.
Our job market, our families, and our government budgets are badly straining under the weighty costs of our health care system.
We need to make health care more affordable.
An excellent discussion has been going on between my administration, legislators of both parties, and health care stakeholders and reformers. I'm hopeful that a bipartisan
agreement will soon be reached to dramatically reform health care in Minnesota.
The heart of the reform is to improve health care productivity and quality by restoring the relationship between doctors and patients.
These days it seems the exam room is crowded with accountants, lawyers and administrators.
The reform will change the way we pay for health care. Currently, we pay doctors for the number of procedures they perform. Instead, we should pay for quality of care and better health care outcomes.
We can also lower costs by encouraging electronic medical records, uniform billing procedures, and by taking more aggressive steps to prevent and treat chronic conditions such as asthma, diabetes, obesity, heart disease, and cancer which account for the vast majority of health care costs.
As these cost containment strategies take hold, savings will be used to help hold down premiums. Some of the savings will also be used to extend health care insurance to more of the uninsured.
Minnesota is the best state in the nation to lead the way on major health care reform. Let's show the country how to do it right.
All of us understand that the most important ticket to the future is the quality of the education our children receive. We should be proud of our Minnesota schools and educators. They have served
us well. Our average student performance is at or near the top in most key measures.
However, we all know those averages don't tell the whole story, and that there is real room for improvement in our schools. There is much to be done, but let me outline a few proposals to help our students and the wonderful educators who dedicate their lives to teach them.
We know the most important indicator of how a child will do in school is the degree to which their parents are effectively engaged in their lives and their education. We should certainly promote, in every conceivable way, parent involvement and parent responsibility.
The second most important factor in determining how children will do in school is the effectiveness of their teachers.
We need to improve teaching and should start by expanding the talent pool for public educators in Minnesota. The teaching profession is no longer consistently attracting top talent through traditional career pathways. Predicted shortages of teachers with needed backgrounds like math and science are beginning to materialize.
Careers no longer progress in traditional or linear fashion in many instances. We need to do more to attract the best talent by encouraging and allowing mid-career professionals to enter the teaching profession with greater ease.
We should also do more to attract the most talented young people to teaching. We need to make it easier for such rising stars with needed subject matter expertise to have an alternative pathway into the profession, even though they may not have majored in education. Part of the attraction for these individuals will be a chance to spend some of their career in public service.
We will have a proposal to begin training a group of these new teachers and get them into the classroom as soon as possible. I am hopeful that the Legislature will support this important effort.
We also need to improve teacher training and evaluation. Rigorous and effective teacher training makes a big difference in student performance, and the current system of ongoing teacher. training needs to be dramatically improved.
Much needs to be done, but let's prioritize by focusing on the area of most acute need and highest impact - training for math and science teachers.
I'm grateful that last year the Legislature included funding for our regional math and science academies. However, we did not receive the amount needed or requested. These academies will give teachers specialized knowledge and enhanced skills that will improve student performance. I am asking that the funding for these academies be increased by 50 percent over the current budget level.
I am also proposing that we design and deploy a world-leading summer training institute for Minnesota's math and science teachers. The institute would feature world-class training In
teaching methods, curriculum, technology, and subject matter mastery.
We should start by training 1,000 teachers over the next two summers. The entire cost would only be a few million dollars, but it will pay big dividends.
We also need to improve teacher evaluation and accountability.
In our current system, teachers have probationary status during their first three years. During that period of time, regular reviews are usually conducted and improvement plans are instituted.
However, once teachers receive tenure status, evaluation and accountability diminish in many districts across Minnesota.
We need to implement a system of post-tenure review. We can design this system in cooperation with the teacher unions, but it must get done. It should include annual evaluations, access to additional training for improvement, and a reasonable amount of time to correct deficiencies.
We also need to come to grips with the fact that most of our kids are leaving our school system in the dust when it comes to use of technology.
The power and efficiency of technology has hardly been tapped in our public K-12 system, but it's transforming almost every other institution and aspect of our lives.
You've heard me speak many times about how our school system needs to become an educational "iPod." We need to offer
children with different backgrounds, learning styles, aptitudes, interests, and learning speeds a semi-customized supplement to their traditional learning environment through technology.
The economies of scale, variety of course offerings, quality control, and student attention-grabbing features of technology will revolutionize education within twenty years. The question for Minnesota is whether we want to lead or follow in this area.
I encourage anyone here to purchase or download one of today's state of the art video games with enhanced graphics and sound. Imagine that power being applied to fourth grade math or tenth grade social studies.
Let's get started by developing a world-class, digitally-stored, always-available, anywhere, anytime, jaw-dropping, eye-popping teaching toolbox accessible to all our teachers and students.
This would not be a state mandated curriculum. Rather, it would be a resource for students, teachers, and districts to use voluntarily to ensure they have access to the highest quality curriculum anywhere. Students could access it to get extra help, complete a course, take an exam, get credit, and speed ahead.
Right behind me, the Mississippi River flows gently by Saint Cloud. About a hundred miles or so north of here, it's a creek you can walk across. More than a thousand miles to the south, it's miles across. It's a river that's always changing, making its way around every obstacle in its path to the sea.
Like our river, Minnesota starts humbly but has an unstoppable forward momentum toward greatness. We're the headwaters state, justly proud of all the amazing things that have started here for 150 yea rs. As the elected leaders of Minnesota, the energy of our people moves us forward. We need to stay within the banks of their values. We need to look downstream and prepare for the challenges we face. And if we do that together, we'll be able to say -- on the far side of all these current troubles - "Well... we made it." May God bless you and may God continue to bless Minnesota for our next great 150 years.
One hundred years ago, John Johnson, another 48-year-old Minnesota governor, returned from the national campaign trail, stood on this very spot and called the state to unity, efficiency and investment.
He dropped dead a few months later.
To my friends in the legislature, you may not be so lucky. My health is good.
So, we'll need to work together to solve the historic challenges confronting our great State. The people we represent are watching, listening, hoping. The challenges we face are so large that we'll need the best ideas and best efforts from across the aisle and across Minnesota.
In just five days, we will inaugurate a talented and optimistic new President, Barack Obama. Our country needs him to succeed. We all wish him well and our prayers are with him.
Today, we're not Democrats. We're not Republicans. We're Minnesotans.
We're all here because we love and care about Minnesota.
Whether it's ice castles or ice fishing; lutefisk or hot dish; the Minnesota Rouser or Purple Rain; going "up north" or playing pond hockey down the street; visiting the world's largest prairie chicken or ear of corn; swapping Ole and Lena jokes or trading real-life stories of how almost every one of us has hit a deer with our car.
Or, maybe it's just the memory of sitting on a dock early in the morning, before the kids get up, with a hot cup of coffee and the lake as still as glass with the only sound being the call of the loon. That's why we love it here. We're a place that enjoys our simple pleasures.

This is Minnesota. Our Minnesota. And we wouldn't trade it for any other place in the world.
But the people we serve are up against a whole new set of difficult challenges, the worst we've seen in a long time. They need and deserve the best leadership and service we here at the Capitol can give them.
By our words and actions, let's not add to the confusion and doubt. Let's give Minnesotans confidence. Let's show them that we understand what they face and that we will make hard choices to lead Minnesota forward. Our challenge this year is not just to close the huge budget deficit. We also have to strategically position Minnesota to thrive in a very different world.
Winston Churchill once said, "If we open a quarrel between the present and the past, we shall be in danger of losing the future."
That pretty well sums up the debate facing Minnesota policy makers.
We're proud of our past and what we've accomplished together in this great State. But we can't be so in love with the past that we miss the future.
An argument between "what was" and "what is" does not prepare us for "what's coming."
We face brand new challenges in a rapidly changing world. The old ways aren't going to cut it anymore.
In Minnesota, we don't have an ocean or a big population or a warm climate, especially this week. Our main resource is us: our intelligence, our creativity, our determination and our self-reliance and most importantly, our common sense. We're going to need those traits now more than ever.
The state of our State is challenged, but overcoming challenges is what Minnesota does best. So let's get at it.
As we begin our work, let's fix an image in our mind.
Imagine a typical Minnesota kitchen table. A mom and dad have just tucked the kids into bed with a kiss and a prayer, and they come back to the table to confront economic reality.

On the table are bills, notices and a notepad with a budget that's tighter than it's ever been. Hope and fear are also at the table.
How do we pay these bills? How do we fix the car? How do we pay this mortgage? How are we going to afford college or even retire someday?
The same emotions, concerns and urgency at that Minnesota kitchen table must be at all the tables we sit at here at the Capitol - the budget hearing table, the agency tables, and the negotiating tables.
And this day, on behalf of Minnesotans sitting at their kitchen tables, I ask each member of the legislature:
Please don't add to their burden by increasing their bill from government.
Please don't take more of their hard earned money.
Please don't raise their taxes.
The couple at the kitchen table begin by setting priorities. What's most important? What can we afford? What do we give up? How can we do things differently? We need to ask and answer the very same questions.
The budget I'll be proposing in just a couple of weeks will rely on significant reductions in state spending, as well as using other resources currently available. The details of that budget will be presented and debated fully very soon. Today, I'm going to focus on the strategic steps Minnesota needs to take to prepare for the future.
We need to start by taking the kitchen table approach and setting priorities.
The highest priority of government is to keep our citizens safe and to make sure we have the capability to protect and defend.
Each day, members of the United States military put on the uniform and then go out and put it all on the line for us. As hard as we think we have it, where would we be without them?

Staff Sergeant Chad Malmberg is a member of the Minnesota National Guard Red Bulls.
While deployed in Iraq in January of 2007, Sergeant Malmberg found himself in the fight of his life. At 27 years old, he was in command of a large convoy when they were ambushed outside of Baghdad by insurgents.
For nearly an hour they took on heavy fire from machine guns and rocket propelled grenades. Outnumbered, Sergeant Malmberg risked his life, going from one vehicle to another to help his soldiers fight back and provide cover. In the midst of this living nightmare, he kept his calm and coordinated ground and air support.
Every soldier's life was saved that day in large part thanks to Sergeant Malmberg and his tremendous courage and leadership.
For his actions, Sergeant Chad Malmberg was the first member of the Minnesota National Guard, since World War II, to be awarded the Silver Star medal.
This is a remarkable story, but there's more. When we held a ceremony to honor Sergeant Malmberg for his heroism, he didn't give a big speech or talk about himself. He came to the podium, asked members of his unit that were with him that fateful day to stand and also be recognized, and then he sat down.
That was it.
That tells you something about his character and his life perspective.
Sergeant Malmberg is with us here today, seated next to the First Lady, in the center gallery behind you. Please join me in thanking and recognizing this remarkable hero.
Sergeant Malmberg and all the members of the military are our heroes and role models, and we must support them however and whenever they need it.
Soon, over 1,000 Minnesota National Guard troops will be taking over the command of 16,000 coalition forces in Iraq. It's just one more example of the amazing work members of the United States Military do day in and day

out. Having the responsibility of a mission like that bestowed upon the Minnesota National Guard is a great tribute to them, to all Minnesota soldiers and to our state.
I'm deeply grateful for all legislators from both parties who have joined our efforts to make Minnesota the most supportive State in the nation for military members and veterans.
My budget this year will maintain our commitments to the members of the military, their families and veterans. I ask for your support in making that a priority again this session.
My budget will also protect state public safety programs and funding, and I'm hopeful the legislature will share that essential priority as well.
Our next priority must be jobs. Having a good job is the quality of life cornerstone for Minnesotans. It's what sustains them, their families, and our communities. And it pays the bills on the kitchen table.
The way to renew our prosperity is to unleash creativity, innovation, entrepreneurship and job growth.
Successful economies are built by people. Our economic landscape is shaped by men and women who see unmet needs and opportunities in the world around them, and devise goods and services to meet them. For all the turmoil in our nation's financial markets, the malfeasance, corruption, and neglected oversight, this truth remains: While government can commission public works, write checks and foster conditions for job growth, it can't match or replace the power of people who create goods, services, and jobs.
The job losses we see across Minnesota are related to a sea change in the national economy. Minnesota is not alone in this crisis, but we do face a unique challenge.
Minnesota has to come to grips with this fact: In 2009, it costs too much for employers to create and keep jobs in this state. If we want to build up employment, we need to bring those costs down. I'm proposing a Minnesota Jobs Recovery Act.

For starters, Minnesota's business tax rate is way too high. A recent study by the Tax Foundation concluded that if Minnesota were a country, we'd have the third highest business tax rates in the world. It's way out of line and it needs to get fixed.
Today, I'm proposing that we cut Minnesota's business tax rate in half. This means reducing the current 9.8 percent business tax rate to 4.8 percent over the next 6 years. This will take us from having one of the worst business tax rates in the country, to having one of the best. It will help us keep and attract more jobs.
We should also remember that small business is the backbone of our economy and has been the source of most of the job growth in the country for a long time.
For those of you who have sought a piece of the American Dream by starting a small business - by hiring your first, your fifth and your tenth employee - and who struggle to survive every day, we thank you, and we salute you.
Many of our small businesses are barely hanging on. In Washington, they're sending billions of dollars to Wall Street. Here in Minnesota, I want us committed to helping Main Street.
These days, lack of financing is a major barrier to small business success. To jump start small business job creation, I've proposed a 50 million dollar package of tax credits that will create over 100 million dollars in new investments.
In addition, I'm proposing a 25 percent refundable tax credit for small business owners that re-invest in their business quickly in order to stimulate our economy.
I'm also proposing a capital gains exemption for qualifying investments in small Minnesota businesses. This will encourage investment in Main Street and help grow jobs.
And here's another thing, companies shouldn't have to do a bunch of paperwork so they can qualify for a bureaucratic rebate from the sales tax

they pay on equipment. Let's just give them a 100 percent exemption from the sales tax - right away when they buy the equipment.
And instead of making these businesses depreciate this equipment over years, let's let them deduct the whole cost right away.
These measures will have immediate impact. They give employers a real incentive to re-invest in their companies and grow jobs.
I know these tax cuts and incentives may seem aggressive in the context of our budget challenges. But we simply have to take dramatic measures to improve our job climate and kick start job growth in Minnesota.
We should also grow jobs by enacting a green jobs initiative. New opportunities in energy from wind, solar, biomass, biogas, geothermal, biofuels and energy conservation are opening a whole new sector of our economy.
Our efforts to increase the use of renewable energy are also paying off.
This fall, the Finnish company Moventas, announced plans to build an 80thousand square-foot plant in Faribault. They'll be making gear boxes for windpower turbines and they selected Minnesota over several other states to do business and grow jobs.
This is another example of Minnesota's growing global influence in renewable energy, particularly windpower. And the tax incentives available through JOBZ played a crucial role.
I've proposed that in addition to JOBZ zones, we create Green JOBZ tax free zones for renewable energy jobs created anywhere in the state. We need more companies like Moventas.
One of our highest priorities must also be to continue to dramatically reform and improve our K-12 education system.
As I said earlier, the quality of life for most Minnesotans depends on their ability to have a good job. Those jobs now and in the future will require our citizens to have a great education and a marketable skill.

Over the last six years, we've improved Minnesota's K-12 education through a series of reforms including: raising our academic standards and graduation requirements; adopting performance pay for teachers through our Q Comp program; upgrading training for our science and math teachers; making more college credit classes available to high school students; and much more.
Minnesota can be proud that we're at or near the top in the country on many education measures. We have the nation-leading ACT scores and our students recently performed among the best in the world in science and math.
But more needs to be done. Our K-12 system is not ready for the future. The success of that system is mission critical to the future success of our state.
Times are tough and our budget crisis is huge. But even at a time like this, we need to increase funding for K-12 schools.
In exchange, we must expect more. My budget will include dramatic reforms and improvements to our K-12 system.
After parents, the quality of teachers is the most important factor in determining student success at school.
A few months ago, I proposed the Teaching Transformation Act to make Minnesota the nation's leader in teacher preparation and training.
We need to aggressively recruit the best and the brightest to become teachers. And we need minimum entrance requirements for teacher preparation programs.
We have minimum requirements for pharmacists, dentists, engineers and just about every other profession. We should have minimum entrance standards for people who do our most important job: educating our children.
The Teaching Transformation Act also strengthens our teacher certification test, requires better teacher preparation programs at our colleges and universities, and more.

We also need to continue to improve and modernize the way we pay teachers.
Minnesota has led the nation in reforming teacher compensation. Our Q Comp program gives school districts more funding if they pay staff for improvements in student learning, rather than just paying for seniority. In these districts, effective teachers get paid more.
This is a common sense program. It pays teachers better for better efforts and better results. And it's paying off.
Three months ago, the Minneapolis School District implemented Q Comp at its 16th site. When they did, Minneapolis Superintendent Dr. Bill Green said: "Q Comp schools have shown real and significant gains in student achievement. Q Comp's focus on improving teacher quality and instructional practice pays off in real gains for all students."
Because every child has a right to a quality education taught by quality teachers, I propose Q Comp be expanded to every corner of our state, every school district and every charter school.
For school districts not currently in Q Comp, this proposal will permanently increase per pupil funding by an amount comparable to a 5 percent increase in the general education funding formula.
While expanding Q Comp is a really important step, we need to do even more.
Our school finance system sends money to schools whether they're doing a good job or not. This isn't how the world works anymore, and it's not in the best interests of student learning or greater accountability.
Let's pay school districts for results. I propose we increase school district funding by up to an additional 2 percent per student for students meeting standards or at least showing reasonable growth towards achievement.
This will align the money we spend with the results we expect. It's common sense. It's how the world works, and it will continue to transform a system that is badly in need of modernization.

We also need to change the way school districts and teacher unions negotiate and settle labor contracts.
The current system is too adversarial, too uncertain and too often places unbearable pressures on school districts to bust their budgets. It also puts the interests of adults ahead of the best interests of children.
We need to bring our process in line with the nearly 40 other states that settle school labor disputes using a fair arbitration process.
This change will not undermine the ability of teacher unions to negotiate hard and receive fair wages. It works well in other states, and it will work here too.
We also need to improve the management of our schools in other ways.
Minnesota has 490 school districts and charter schools, each of which purchase IT, food services, textbooks and supplies. We should require them to come together for bulk purchasing in order to lower costs and eliminate waste.
This will put more money in the classroom, exactly where it belongs.
I'm pleased to be working with a bipartisan group of legislators, including Senator Terri Bonoff and Representative Ryan Winkler on this important step.
Of course, the need for education reform is not limited to K-12. For several years we've driven reform and innovations in higher education with incentive funding.
But our current higher education system must find even more ways to become more efficient and less focused on geography and bricks and mortar.
It's time our colleges and universities move more aggressively to deliver more of their courses online. From paying bills, and buying airline tickets, to keeping up with friends, much of our lives are now online.
A couple of months ago I met Gina Drellack, a mother of two who earned her degree from Bemidji State University -- online. She was able to take
classes at times and places that were convenient to her, including at her kitchen table. It was flexible, modern and efficient. As a result, she was able to keep her family as a top priority and maintain employment at the same time. She graduated about a year ago, and credits online learning with helping to transform her life.
I know online courses won't replace some needed face-to-face education and hands-on experience, and we don't want it to. But our higher education story needs to look and sound a lot more like Gina's story. The higher education marketplace is clearly and undeniably moving in that direction. The only question will be whether Minnesota leads or follows.
That's why I've challenged Minnesota's state college and university system to deliver 25 percent of their credits online by 2015. I'm grateful MnSCU's board and leadership have accepted the challenge and appreciate the progress they have made to this point. I also appreciate the University of Minnesota's efforts in this area.
To help our younger students get ready for this future, I've proposed that our state high school graduation standards require every student to participate in an online experience by the time they graduate.
This year, I'm also asking that we add a new element of cost accountability for higher education. It's this: we should impose a firm cap on tuition increases. Otherwise, the necessary changes in higher education we will make this session will fall too heavily on students and their families.
Next, we need to deal with the second largest part of our budget: health and human services.
As we all know, Minnesota's programs in this area have become unreasonably expensive and their cost is unsustainable.
The budget forecast shows these programs will go up nearly 19 percent if left unchecked.
We must slow down the rate of spending growth in these programs or it will eliminate our ability to fund other priorities in the future. As my budget will reflect, there is no easy way to do this. But, in the midst of these changes, we will protect all current health care eligibility for children.
My next priority is to reform the way government does business.
Workers in the private sector are facing big layoffs, big pay cuts and sharply reduced hours. Government employees will experience layoffs too. However, we should do what we can to minimize them and a wage freeze will help. I'm proposing we freeze all state government wages for the next two years.
I'm also proposing that we enact legislation to require a wage freeze for any Minnesota government entity that accepts state money.
Here's another way we're going to reform the business of government.
Our system of 87 different county governments was designed for a different era. Most county functions are duplicated 87 times over, to the detriment of taxpayers. I'm not proposing to eliminate counties. But I am proposing that we save money by encouraging counties to work together.
We should incentivize counties to create, join and operate no more than 15 new regional enterprises that will manage and run all human service programs so each county doesn't have to run their own.
We should also require local units of government to use the leverage of the state's buying power to purchase commodities such as road salt, paper and IT services at a reduced price, unless they can find a better price themselves.
It's no secret that funding for cities and counties is going to have to be reduced to close our budget deficit. Since it's not secret we're not going to send them as much money, we need to help them in other ways. We should reduce or eliminate as many state mandates as possible. We should also allow townships, cities or counties to opt-out of some state mandates by vote of their governing body.
I want to particularly thank the Association of Minnesota Counties for their vision in redefining the county-state relationship. It's a bold plan and we look forward to continuing to work with them during the session.
And county lines are not the only political boundaries that need to be crossed.
Wisconsin Governor Jim Doyle and I have been working together to find state government operations that can be combined or coordinated to save money in both states.
You often hear the reference about when "the lion will lay down with the lamb." Well how about this: in the near future ... the Gopher will lie down with the Badger.
As I close, let's go back to that Minnesota kitchen table. Yes, there's fear and worry at that table, but there's also hope, and optimism. In our own modest way, Minnesotans have a confidence that we can find a way and make it work. We always have.
A few miles from here is the College of St. Catherine, the largest women's college in America. Sister Antonia McHugh built this college from almost nothing. She was raised on the prairie at the turn of the last century. And, like many Minnesotans before and since, the things she learned in the joys and rigors of rural life gave her the skills to become a great leader.
Listen to her words describing the pioneers who came before her:
"The soul of a pioneer woman is a beautiful thing.... full of wisdom and hope and self-sacrifice.... [They] saw visions and dreamed dreams while they were facing the bare realities.... They had faith in the new land, and faith made them zealous."
As we face bare realities, we need that same faith in the future. We need to find that same wisdom and hope and willingness to sacrifice in ourselves. And like generations before us, we need help from our Creator.
As Abraham Lincoln said, without God's help, we cannot succeed, and with His help, we cannot fail.
May God bless you all and may God continue to bless the great state of Minnesota.
This state of the state address is not the most important thing that happened in Minnesota this week - not by a long shot.
The most important thing that happened this week is that our Red Bulls of the Minnesota National Guard came home.
Let me tell you what they did. This was the first time since World War II that a National Guard unit from any state was given complete command authority for such large military activities in a war zone.
They were given this awesome mission for one reason: they are the best.
If all of us as Minnesotans, in whatever our responsibilities, and whatever our challenges, can reflect even a fraction of their spirit, dedication, courage, and strength, Minnesota will continue to be one of the most remarkable places the world has ever known.
I'd also like to recognize and thank each public servant here today. Holding public office is a high honor. But honor has its sacrifices, which your families also bear.
To them and to you: thank you for serving the good people of Minnesota.
To those here today who hope to be Governor next year - I have a few tips for all of you.
First, schedule a monthly haircut to manage your mullet.
Second, try to make sure the person who is responsible for representing your positions in court, the Attorney General, is also not your re-election opponent.

Third, don't kiss an eelpout on the lips, even if the locals say it's for good luck.
Fourth, before you take the microphone at a Minnesota Wild game, carefully practice pronouncing the word "puck."
But seriously and most importantly, make sure you have a patient, kindhearted, smart, and wonderfully supportive spouse. Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in recognizing and thanking the First Lady of Minnesota, Mary Pawlenty, for her great work on behalf of our state.
Today, the state of our state is challenged, but our spirit is resilient.
Way back in 1832, explorer Henry Schoolcraft completed his quest and discovered the true source of the Mississippi River.
As we gather here today, we're also on a quest. We're looking for the true source of economic recovery.
That's what I want to talk to you about today.
The true source is not bigger government, special interests, or political parties. The true source is good jobs for our people.
We all want to maintain Minnesota's quality of life. But the term "quality of life," and all that it implies, is an empty boast if people don't have jobs.
Today, many Minnesotans live with uncertainty and fear because ofthe historically awful economy.
Many have been robbed of their dreams by the mistakes or recklessness of others. They're not statistics; they're people dealing with heartbreaking misfortune.
As some of you know, I grew up in South St. Paul. It was a town that depended on mammoth meatpacking plants and the world's largest stockyards to provide good jobs.
But the meatpacking industry changed, and the plants shut down. The massive job loss and crushing impact on families and the community was

frightening, even to those of us who were just kids.
When I was still in high school, my mom died and a few years later my dad lost his job at a trucking company. At first, I was scared and confused.
I felt bad for my dad. He was a decent and hardworking guy who asked for nothing more than the chance to do right by his family.
Many Minnesota moms and dads, and their children, are experiencing those types of feelings now.
So, the most important question before us is this: how do we best grow good, private sector jobs in Minnesota?
The people who can best answer that question aren't in this room. They're not in Congress. They're not in the White House. They're not in bureaucracies. In fact, they're usually not in government or politics at all.
The people who best know how to create jobs are the people who have actually done it.
If government listens to them, this is what it'll hear loud and clear: "Get out of our way. Leave us alone. Make it easier, not harder."
The message is clear, so let's get to work. For starters, it's plainly obvious that Minnesota's tax system is not even close to competitive. It was established in a different era for a different economy by politicians that most likely couldn't envision the hypercompetitive world of today. It's almost pre-Sid Hartman thinking.
Thankfully, we've made some progress by achieving a decades-long goal of getting Minnesota out of the top ten states in taxes.
We've dramatically slowed down state government spending.
And even in this economy, we've seen Minnesota's GDP grow more than 25% during my time in office.
While our unemployment rate is too high, it's significantly below the national average.

But, the bad news is Minnesota's business tax climate is the 8th worst in the nation. That means 42 other states have a competitive edge on Minnesota.
We have the 3rd highest corporate tax rate in the developed world. Our personal income and sales tax rates are among the highest in the country, . and Minnesota offers no preferential rate for capital gains.
We need to face the facts: Minnesota's tax system is costing us jobs, and our tax code needs to change to meet the challenges and opportunities of our time.
So, today, I urge the legislature to pass my Jobs Creation Bill that has six vital parts: 1. A 20% reduction in the corporate tax rate; 2. A 20% exclusion from taxation for small businesses; 3. An angel investment tax credit; 4. A supercharged research and development tax credit; 5. A capital gains exclusion for qualified investments; and 6. Incentives for companies to invest in Minnesota small businesses.
These steps will encourage job growth and send a strong signal that Minnesota is moving in a more pro-growth, pro-jobs direction.
These are important steps, but many more will be needed this year, and in the years to come, if Minnesota is going to be truly competitive in a changing economy.
One thing we can, and should do now, is improve and renew the JOBZ program. It's needed and it works.
Let me give you an example.
A few years ago, Minnesota Twist Drill in Chisholm was planning to leave the state. A few employees bought the company.
Using JOBZ and some other tools, they kept the company here and have more than doubled employment to 130 jobs in an area that desperately needs them.

We should also use a tool like this as part of an effort, along with local partners, to keep making cars or trucks in Saint Paul. Seven-hundred-fifty hardworking people at the Ford plant want to keep their jobs and we should do all we can to help them.
I am asking the legislature to pass my plan to create a "CARZ" zone at the Ford Plant that will offer tax incentives similar to the JOBZ program..
Here's the next thing: we need to reduce government spending because it leads to job-killing tax increases.
From 1960, the year I was born, until I became Governor in 2003, state government spending increased an average of21 % every two years. That's outrageous and unsustainable by any measure.
During my time as Governor, we've dramatically slowed down state government spending and we actually cut spending for the first time in Minnesota's history!
Most states outpacing Minnesota in job growth from 2003 to the crash of 2008 spent less, not more, per capita, on government. The few exceptions were states with sparse population or unique circumstances.
It's a no brainer. Companies make common sense decisions to grow and add jobs where it costs less.
Minnesota is accustomed to a very different model. For generations, most Minnesota politicians wanted more taxes because they wanted more government, and they got it.
They believed the presumed benefits of big government outweighed the big tax burdens placed on our citizens and job providers.
In Minnesota, this doesn't just apply to Democrats. Let's be fair about it.
This approach has endured under the leadership of previous governors and legislators from all parties, with only modest exceptions, until now.
Many have argued that was a good approach and they believe the way forward is the way backwards. My friends, it's not.

We can't afford all of the spending that's been promised and expected, even if we return to normal economic growth.
Times have changed and there's no going back.
I know this will be debated here over the next few months, and the election this fall will settle the issue in the near term.
. In the long term, however, competitive forces will decide this issue, as they always do. The future will demand that Minnesota compete or be left behind.
One thing we can do right now is fix Minnesota's budget process.
The way we budget today is backwards. Around here, we decide how much to spend before we know how much we'll take in.
That's why I am calling for a constitutional amendment to require that future spending commitments not exceed revenues currently collected.
We should spend only what we have, not what we hope to have.
That's a common sense approach understood at every kitchen table in Minnesota.
We also need to reduce spending at all levels of government, not just the state level. The property tax caps we passed a couple years ago are helping, but they expire after next year. Let's make those property tax caps permanent.
We also must balance the state's budget. Unlike the federal government, our constitution requires it. As difficult as it will be, we simply must make it happen.
As each day goes by, it becomes much harder because our options narrow dramatically. Think of this: The state spends about $43 million from the general fund each day. At this point, we're spending $2.3 million more per day than we receive in revenue.
We must act decisively and quickly.

I know the unallotments I made last summer are controversial. But, to bring needed certainty and stability to our budget during this epic crisis, I'm asking the legislature to ratify those decisions. Those unallotments simply cannot be restored at this point.
On Monday, you'll see my plan to solve the additional budget deficit identified in the November budget forecast. It will include very dramatic and painful spending reductions. While programs for the military, veterans, core public safety functions and K-12 classrooms will be protected, nearly all other areas will be proposed for reduction.
The reaction to my budget proposals from most of the people in this room will be predictable. Fair enough. I look forward to your alternative proposals.
Again, each day that goes by means more options are taken off the table, the hole is dug deeper and the problem gets much harder to solve. There may come a point where lack of action will make it nearly impossible to solve the problem if we don't act soon.
Beyond controlling government spending and reforming our tax code, we can do even more to improve Minnesota's economy and create jobs.
In business, time is money and delay impacts a company's ability to compete.
The good news is my administration has dramatically cut the wait time for environmental permits. But we can do more.
This week, I issued additional directives to state agencies that will streamline Minnesota's permitting process and speed things up even further.
Attracting new businesses and creating good jobs also depends on a well-educated and skilled workforce.
Many of our students are doing very well. But let's face the facts:.too many are not. We've enacted nation-leading reforms to improve our schools, but we must do more.

Persistently low achieving schools need new leadership, new authority, and new teachers hired and assigned based on performance, not seniority.
These changes occur most frequently when mayors are in control of a large urban school districts or when alternative school models are used.
I support giving mayors the accountability and full control, and I mean full control, of the Minneapolis and St. Paul school districts. Short of that, however, I've directed the Department of Education to use existing authority to create an Office of Turnaround Schools and make the changes I've just described.
We also know the most important school-related factor in determining how a student will perform is the quality and preparedness of their teachers.
Now, I know the teacher unions don't like it, but I again plead with you to pass the "Teaching Transformation Act." It will dramatically improve teacher quality, training, and accountability for results.
I am also asking the legislature to reform teacher tenure.
Everybody knows the current tenure system is a public policy fossil. Tenure should be renewed every five years, and it should be based on evaluations linked to student performance.
Teaching is an honorable and indispensable profession. But we don't raise its value by lowering our standards.
We also know that we can't grow jobs if health care costs are pushing companies, families, and governments towards bankruptcy. The good news is that Minnesota has led the way in health care reform, and I'm proud we have. '
Minnesota has become the most consumer-centered health care market in the country. We've taken the lead in providing consumers with information about health care costs and quality.
Minnesota is also leading the country in paying for better health outcomes rather than just the volume of procedures. We're moving from a system of "sick care" to a real "health care" system.

We also have the highest usage of health savings accounts of any state.
I ask the legislature to take yet another step toward improving the affordability and quality of our health care system.
Three plans control almost all the health care market in Minnesota. We have little real choice when selecting our health insurance.
We live in a world where we can buy almost anything from anywhere, anytime on the Internet. Why not health insurance?
I propose that state law be changed to give consumers the choice to buy health insurance across state lines.
We also need to overhaul our publicly subsidized health care system. Its costs are out of control.
Most Minnesotans who have private health insurance are rewarded for shopping smart for their health care. If it's expected for us as taxpayers, then the taxpayers should expect the same from those we help on public assistance.
I urge the legislature to pass our proposals to reform MinnesotaCare and Medical Assistance.
Beyond these important measures, we can make bipartisan progress on a number of other problems.
For example, we should improve public safety by cracking down on drunk drivers by enacting my proposal which makes it clear: "If you don't breathe, you don't leave."
We should get dangerous sexual predators off our streets by doubling their prison sentences.
We should improve our democratic process by ensuring our deployed military members can vote on time.
We should also enact a bonding bill, provided it's affordable, reasonable and

focused.
I look forward to working with the members of the legislature on these and other matters.
But, we should always remember our first priority is good jobs.
We've all experienced the so-called "Minnesota goodbye" - where the guest announces they're leaving multiple times before they actually do, It can often start at a table, move to the front door, then the front yard, and even move down the driveway with multiple hugs along the way. At its finest, it concludes with a goodbye shouted through a car window as the guest drives away.
I'll try to avoid that ritual as I leave this office in 11 months, but I do have just a few more things to say.
Minnesotans have our little quirks. But we count our blessings by what's really at our core - the character of our people and our magnificent natural splendor.
Visitors sometimes don't understand the love we have for this place. They think of it as cold, far from oceans, and a place that even airplane pilots can miss altogether.
But for those of us who live here, we understand the common sense and uncommon beauty that make our state something special.
Now, it's true, Minnesotans have to worry about such things as whether the ice will be off the lake in time for the fishing opener, kicking asteroid size ice chunks from the wheel well of our cars, and training the next generation to endure the ritual of falling madly in love with the Vikings, only to be . dumped at the altar of the Super Bowl.
We get excited at the arrival of spring, when we can once again fire up the lawnmower and the grill.
We enjoy our summer trips to the Dairy Queen with the kids. We like . bicycle rides around lakes and long, slow evenings next to a bonfire with family and friends.
But for all the reasons we love Minnesota, let's remember the real miracle of Minnesota is the goodness of our people.
Let me share an amazing example of this amazing Minnesota spirit: the St. Sauver family of Pierz, Minnesota.
Even for Joe Mauer it's a big deal to bat 5 for 5 in a ball game.
But the St. Sauver family has gone 6 for 6 in service to our state and country.
All six members of their family serve the military - and all of us - in some capacity.
Lt. Col. Scott St. Sauver leads the Minnesota National Guard's 151 Field Artillery Battalion currently deployed in Iraq. He is on his second tour in five years.
His wife, Deb, works at the Camp Ripley Family Assistance Center, where she helps Guard members and their families before, during, and after a Guard member is deployed.
Scott and Deb are incredibly proud of their four children and so are we. Chris, Anthony, Blake and Ashley all followed their father's example and each one of them joined the National Guard.
Service to a cause greater than themselves is a way of life for Minnesotans and the St. Sauver family. Everyone of St. Sauvers insists there's nothing extraordinary about what they do.
I beg to differ.
Please join me in showing our appreciation to our veterans, military members and their families by recognizing Deb St. Sauver, and Staff Sergeant Anthony St. Sauver, who are seated in the gallery.
We govern in challenging times, but Minnesota has faced challenges before. Our state has seen it all and been through it all. And Minnesotans always rise to the challenge.
Let me give you an example: During the Great Depression, one of the great job creators in Minnesota's history emerged - Curt Carlson. He was a man of boundless energy and unquenchable enthusiasm. He had an amazing ability to see opportunity even in the most dire circumstances.
Curt Carlson started his career delivering newspapers and eventually created a Minnesota company that is now known and respected around the world. Today, Carlson Companies employ 3,500 people in our state and 150,000 globally.
His personal motto would be a great approach for all of us to take into the. challenges we face. He said: "Whatever you do, do with integrity. Wherever you go, go as a leader. Whomever you serve, serve with caring. Whenever you dream, dream with your all. And never, ever, give up."
That's good advice, but above and beyond economic growth and jobs, we must always remember there's something even more important.
It's captured in the very first words of the Minnesota Constitution:
"We, the people of Minnesota, grateful to God for our civil and religious liberty, and desiring to perpetuate its blessings and secure the same to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this constitution."
These words were written by pioneers and adventurers who faced dangers and uncertainty far greater than our own.
Let's be thankful to God for our liberty.
Be grateful for His many blessings, especially in challenging times.
And continue to trust the goodness and the resilience of Minnesotans.
These truths will carry us forward to a better Minnesota.
They always have and they always will.
May God bless you and may God continue to bless the great State of Minnesota.
