Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, Members of the 68th Session of the Minnesota Legislature, Members of the Supreme Court, Constitutional Officers, and fellow citizens of Minnesota:
The last session of this Legislature accomplished a landmark in Minnesota history -- the most basic tax reform in many decades.
This session of the Legislature must do even more. It is our unique mandate to extend the spirit-and energy of reform to government itself.
Two years ago we set out to make state government "more responsive to our people and more imaginative in the service of their needs."
To extend that responsiveness, to enlarge our imagination, is the task before this session. 


Responsiveness must be built upon a new openness in government, an openness beyond any we have known before.
I congratulate you on your own unprecedented efforts toward this goal.
As the first business of this session you are opening doors that until now have been not only closed, but locked.

You are providing for: Fair minority representation. More open committee meetings. More recorded, public votes. More public access to records of your sessions, and all the rest. Those of you who fought for and won these essential reforms should know this; that thanks to you, no one will ever dare to turn back the clock again. But this is just the beginning. We must open up the rest of our governmental and political processes as well. The agenda is long, because for far too long it was ignored. Since 1913, the people of this state have had to wear blindfolds in the voting booth. This session of the Legislature is going to take those blindfolds off! Because our first step must be party designation for all those seeking election to the Minnesota Legislature. The urgency and importance of this measure can be suggested by this comment: If you pass the party designation bill by noon tomorrow, I will sign it before you leave the Capitol that evening. But party designation is only one of our imperatives.


Everyone of us who has ever campaigned knows that there is a deadly cancer infecting our free election system -- the way we are forced to finance our political campaigns.
Open government requires a tough, practical, enforceable disclosure of campaign contributions, and it must be passed this session.
Even disclosure laws, though, are only a very partial solution to the real plague on all our houses.
I have served in state government for 14 years, as a House member, a Senate member, and Governor. I receive great satisfaction from public service, and so do you. I believe in meeting the jury of our citizens in election campaigns" and so do you.
But the traditional way of soliciting campaign money sickens and alienates the public and undermines the very fabric of our institutions.
The late Adlai Stevenson said: "I doubt that it's possible to be elected President .. and deserve the office."
Secretary of Agriculture Earl Butz put it another way:
"Find a Congressman's financial angel. That's the way I worked to beat a bill raising price supports. I called up one chap and started to explain the bill. He said 'Don't bother. I'll just tell the Congressman I don't want it.' He did. That was it."

Every campaign sees the Democrats criticizing the Republicans for outrageous methods of procuring large contributions, and the Republicans accusing the Democrats of precisely the same thing.
Both sides are right, and both sides are guilty. So when some try to make this a partisan issue -- they're fooling no one.
If we really are serious about putting an end to special interest contributions, then the answer isn't merely disclosure or limitations on spending'. It is something much more fundamental.
The only way to really clean up the financing of political campaigns is to provide a method to finance campaigns by hundreds and thousands of small contributors.
And there is only one way to achieve that in the near future. We must give each taxpayer an opportunity to contribute to the party and candidates of his choice.
I recommend that the 1973 Legislature provide for a $1.00 check-off on the state income tax, just as the Congress and the President have attempted to meet this problem at the national level.
This does not mean that the taxpayer would add a dollar when he pays his tax bill. It means that one of the tax dollars he is already paying would be assigned to public financing of election campaigns -- if the taxpayer so chooses.


We would not be forcing anyone to contribute, but we would be providing Minnesota citizens the opportunity to help end a practice that taints us all.
We cannot guarantee that this plan will work perfectly, but if openness and honesty and integrity are to be more than fine words, then we had better try.
We must continue these reform efforts until any American can run for office in this country without losing either his shirt, his self-respect, or his independence -or all three.
To turn, for a moment, to another legislative problem:
We all know the long, complicated, expensive story of legislative reapportionment in 1971. We failed. The Federal Courts, not state officials, finally reapportioned our Legislature -- and barely in time.
We did redistrict the Congressional seats. And we did what we usually do when we redistrict. We protected the incumbents. In fact, we gave six of them even safer seats -- which took some doing. That's wrong. That's not open government. That doesn't give the people the chance to change things. I believe a candidate from either party ought to have at least a fighting chance to win. We made this more difficult -- perhaps impossible.

And that's what we will do again unless we find a new way to reapportion and redistrict.
I propose a Constitutional Amendment to take Legislative and Congressional reapportionment out of the hands of the Legislature and assign it to a bi-partisan commission, as recommended by the Constitutional Study Commission.
I fully support this top priority recommendation of the Commission.
I also support another legislative ,reform. Two years ago I recommended that the Legislature cut its size effective after the 1980 census, if a reduction could not be accomplished in the reapportionment process. I still support such a measure, and I hope the 1973 Legislature will pass it. Our citizens also deserve better opportunities to vote. In the 1972 campaign in Minnesota, several hundred thousand potential voters failed to register, in spite of a vigorous bi-partisan- registration effort. This Legislature must give serious consideration to a system which permits a voter to register on election day if he has not already done so. Voting is a right and not a privilege. We must insure the people access to that fundamental right.

I do not need to inform the members of this Legislature that perhaps the best way to open a unit of government to the people is to require that its members be elected. Accordingly, I strongly recommend that this session of the Legislature transform the Metropolitan Council potentially the most innovative force in our largest urban area -- from an appointive to an elective body.

As a result, we are faced today with a conflict in metropolitan government, a vagueness over lines of authority, an impasse over how decisions should be made that affect directly the lives of half the people of this state. Today's indecision is the price of yesterday's neglect. The failure to fully define and anticipate the role of metropolitan government is becoming clearer each day.
I am convinced that history will show our efforts at metropolitan government to be among the most significant innovations ever begun by a State Legislature. Our response must recognize that significance.
I ask this session to give major priority of time and attention to metropolitan .government, to establishing clearly its authority and framework. We must treat this as a necessity, not an afterthought.
We also need to open up the executive branch of state government.
Perhaps the greatest strength of our system is that elected officials are held strictly accountable for the performance of their administrations.
What concerns me is that I want to hold our key state department heads equally accountable for their departments and the responsibilities we place on them.

But that!s not really possible when we deny to some department heads, with thousands of employees, the right to choose their own management teams, of even 3 or 4. For example, we have an outstanding Commissioner of Highways with over 5,000 employees in his department and we do not permit him to select a single one when he takes office.
There is a danger that we have given the entrenched bureaucracy a veto over the elected representatives of the people.
That's wrong. We must change it. I will ask for appropriate changes in the laws to assure the responsiveness and accountability of our administrative leadership. Another method, long overdue, for opening and strengthening state government is to place more representatives of the public on policy boards and commissions. We can increase the size of boards where necessary to make room for public members. Finally, the people's right to know is not guaranteed by the openness of government alone. These times also demand that we take steps in Minnesota to protect reporters from intimidation by government in carrying on their legitimate work.

A number of newsmen are now in jail around the country for refusing to reveal confidential sources. I regret that the pressure seems to be increasing.
Reporters are being prosecuted not because they are irresponsible, but precisely because they have been responsible to their basic function of publishing the truth.
Everyone in public life occasionally disagrees with some article or coverage. But government officials who fear the press, and seek to suppress it, are very short-sighted indeed. For our system of government itself would die without the freedom of speech and freedom of the press guaranteed us in the First Amendment.
Several states now have laws that shield reporters from revealing confidential sources of information. I recommend the passage of such a bill by this Legislature.
I hope that these recommendations for open government will be acted upon by the Legislature. And I hope you will go on from there to carry out the spirit of openness with which this session has begun.
And now, let us turn to the value that our people receive from their tax dollars.
The last session of the Legislature was known for its successful attempt to bring justice to our state tax system. This session must become known for bringing justice to the spending of those tax dollars.


Many Minnesotans believe there is waste and inefficiency in state government. The major reason they believe so is that there is waste and inefficiency in our state government.
For example, more than 3,000 dormitory beds are empty across the public college campuses of our state.
They are empty because of poor planning. The State of Minnesota built more dormitories than it needs. The people of Minnesota are paying the price and will continue to pay it for a long time to come.
We know that more and more elementary school classrooms are standing empty -- not ancient, decrepit buildings for the most part, but relatively recent facilities built at considerable cost to the taxpayers of those districts.
In one of our state departments, there are three vehicles for each employee -- and the grass grows high around some of those vehicles.
One of our state college campuses, the newest facility in the system, stands with twice as many classrooms as it needs. Present projections are that many or most of those classrooms will never be needed on that campus.
Some major and expensive mistakes have been made. They were not deliberate. Many of us here helped make them.

But they wasted state tax dollars. And wasted dollars do not serve human needs. Every wasted dollar, every short-range commitment that comes back to haunt us with long-range consequences, deprives the people of the state of funds
that could go to meet urgent human needs.
The need for economy in state government has never been so clear. The sick and the handicapped and the helpless will be properly served only when first-rate, tough, hard planning and management are required of every department and agency in this state. We can no longer tolerate a situation where Chambers of Commerce in the communities of our state are pitted against one another in a desperate effort to lobby for short-range advantages, and state pOlicy becomes a matter of who wins the battle.
This was the old way of doing things. We cannot afford it, now or ever again.
That is why I am so pleased with the success of one of the most remarkable projects ever undertaken in state government.
The State of Minnesota is a large and complex enterprise with a multi-billion dollar budget. If we were listed on the Fortune magazine list of 500 largest corporations in the nation, we would be 37th from the top.


with this in mind we asked Minnesota's businessmen to share their expertise with the state. We wanted the state to adopt the best most modern business procedures and techniques, wherever possible.
The response from the business community was overwhelming.
Since June, the Loaned Executives Action Program, known as L.E.A.P., has provided the state with a staff of 74 full-time and 26 part-time people, representing 50 of the top corporations in the state. Under the capable direction of Douglas Dayton, they have devoted the equivalent of 26 man-years to the examination of our state government at no expense to the state.
They sent us their best. We are now receiving 139 separate, far-reaching reports on our various agencies and departments. L.E.A.P.'s summary report will be published in the next few days. I was surprised, and pleased, and very, very grateful to the Minnesota business community for its toughness and candor. Let me" assure you that they did not tell us only those things they thought we wanted to hear. Now we have the job of following through. We must continue to keep the pressure on every state department and on ourselves. The dollars we save will serve the people of our state.

The L.E.A.P. report also includes legislative recommendations. They will be forwarded to you during the coming weeks as we are able to prepare and refine them, and I hope you will give them earnest consideration.
And may I state my strong hope that other units of government will seek the counsel and management capabilities of our business community too. There is no unit of government that cannot greatly improve its effectiveness through such cooperation. I include, most specifically, our local school boards, who are responsible for spending a very major portion of the revenues which are raised within the state.
Two major L.E.A.P. recommendations for reorganizing the central administration of state government will be among my legislative requests -- the centralizing of our state personnel administration and the strengthening of our budgeting, finance, and auditing processes. These steps are extremely important to real economy in our state government.
And I will make one other major legislative request to improve our state government as well.
In part, the respect and esteem we have for the people of our state and their government can be measured by the priority and concern we give to attracting the most talented, the best trained, the best equipped people to state service. That is how we provide the kind of state service our people deserve.
But our state government finds it very difficult to compete for those people.

When I assumed office, I knew that we were not competitive with private business and school districts. But I was alarmed to discover that the state could not compete with county and city governments for comparable talent.
The problem is not just salaries. In a recent survey of retirement benefits for 41 states, for employees with 20 years of service, Minnesota ranked 39th from the top. We were ahead of Nebraska and South Dakota, and behind everybody else. For retirees with 30 years of service, we were not much better -- 36th of the 41 states in the survey. What does this mean? It means that it is very difficult to attract the best qualified men and women to state government, no matter how dedicated they are. And it means that people who devote their lives to our state government receive almost nothing in return. A psychiatric technician at one of our state hospitals, with 20 years of devotion to the mentally ill, can retire with $107 a month under our present retirement program. A highway technician, with 20 years of service, retires at the handsome rate of $101 per month. A senior highway maintenance worker, with 32 years of state service, receives just $213 a month.

.A Senior Division Head, one of our top management employees, with 46 years service, earns just $5,600 a year in retirement benefits. After 46 years. And that's at the top of our scale.
Our mandatory retirement age is 70 for the state retirement system. Few retire any earlier. They simply can't afford it.
And just as with any other employee, the retirement age for custody officers in our corrections system is also 70, with poor retirement benefits.
The present system insures that people 68 and 69 years old must deal with prisoners and the criminally insane who are half their age and several times their strength.
Too old to perform the job as it should be performed, unwilling to retire to a humiliating pension, they keep on -- as well as they can.
This is the most appalling, the most dangerous waste in state government that I know.
There is only one answer. We must improve our retirement benefits. We must reduce the age for mandatory retirement to 65, and to age 55 for custody officers at our prisons and security hospitals and others whose lives and abilities are placed in jeopardy ..

Under this plan, between 1,500 to 1,800 employees would be able to retire by the end of the next biennium.
We can bring more than 150 young, strong, trained new employees into service for our corrections system alone.
My budget message will contain more specific information on this proposal.
With this retirement program, with careful review of all vacant positions, and with the recommendations on complement that I will make in my budget message, I am today setting the goal of trying to reduce "the number of Minnesota state employees by five percent by the end of the next biennium.
I believe that can be accomplished while improving the quality of services provided by the state.
With your help, an improved retirement program is another step we can take to provide real economy in state government. 

Neither open government nor economy in government is justified solely for its own sake.
But openness and economy will better equip us to meet the central purpose of government, which is to anticipate and meet human needs.
These needs are many and complex.

In the field of human rights, there are several steps that must be taken now.
Our first priority must be ratification of the Federal Equal Rights Amendment. I fully support and strongly encourage such action, as you know.
But $tate government should also lead the way in making employment and promotions available on a non-discriminatory basis to minorities and women. Our state has not led the way. We must catch up and move ahead. It is a necessary, basic human commitment.
Therefore, I will ask the Legislature to provide support for the state Affirmative Action Program instituted this Fall by Executive Order.
I will also ask the Legislature to extend our anti-discrimination laws to cover the handicapped, and place this new responsibility in the Department of Human Rights.
With a proper opportunity to try, many of our handicapped citizens can become both productive and independent.
They deserve to be judged on their capability to do the work, yet they are often automatically excluded because of their handicaps. Placing them under the antidiscrimination laws is a necessary first step to opportunity.

Another significant step this Legislature must take is to lower the age of majority to 18 years in Minnesota.
Our laws clearly discriminate against 18 to 20 year old citizens. We have already given these citizens the right to vote by amendment of the Federal Constitution. With that amendment we extended to them the most precious right that can be exercised. It would be hypocritical now to attempt to deny these young people their other rights as well, including the right to hold public office.
The needs of the average workingmen and women of Minnesota constitute a very major order of unfinished business that awaits resolution by this session of the Legislature.
This Legislature should pass a state minimum wage law tied to the Federal Minimum Wage which will reflect all future federal increases. The current $1.75 per hour Federal Minimum Wage should be provided for all full time workers. Time and one-half should be provided for all hours worked in excess of forty hours a week.
We must also increase Unemployment Compensation benefits. Increases should reflect the earning level of the worker.

Our law now provides a weekly benefit equal to fifty percent of the average weekly wage of the worker, subject to a maximum of $64. Thus, regardless of how high an individual's earnings may have been, he cannot collect a weekly benefit in excess of $64.
I recommend that the maximum be changed from $64 to sixty percent of the average weekly wage paid in Minnesota in the preceding year.
Coverage should also be extended to include a number of farm workers. I recommend that agricultural employers who employ a total of four or more workers for twenty or more weeks should be required to provide benefits.
We should also extend Unemployment Compensation benefits to workers who are put out of work by labor disputes in which they are not participants.
Along with adequate wages and benefits, I am equally concerned that working conditions be as safe and as healthy as possible. The new Federal Occupational Safety and Health Act is an important tool to help us achieve these ends.
My Budget will contain requests for state matching funds to permit implementation of OSHA in Minnesota as quickly as possible so that Minnesota's work force may derive maximum benefit.

Workers who are injured on the job should be guaranteed maximum allowable Workmen's Compensation. We need to integrate our benefits with the new disability provisions under the Social Security Act.
We intend to continue to scrutinize carefully how our state programs can be coordinated with federal programs to maximize benefits for all Minnesota workers.
Fair treatment for Minnesota's workers will also require revision of the Public Employees Labor Relations Act.
A means must be provided to settle impasse situations.
I recommend that the Act be amended to provide for voluntary binding arbitration.
The Act should also be clarified to distinguish between supervisory and non-supervisory personnel.
And no consideration of human needs in Minnesota can omit the very real and growing threat to our family farmers.
In California, 45 conglomerates own 61 percent of all the farm land in the state.
I don't want that to happen here. These figures reflect a major threat to the quality of life of any state. We can still protect our family farms by passing the Family Farm Act of 1973 which will restrict the right of conglomerates and huge foreign corporations to penetrate and take over our family farm system in Minnesota.

I have also signed an Executive Order creating a Rural Development Council, as I indicated I would a few weeks ago.
This Council will be instrumental, I predict, in organizing the resources of state government to focus on the needs of outstate Minnesotans.
Our Vietnam veterans also deserve our help. They served bravely in a war that they should not have had to fight at all. I know we share the commitment made by our voters last November to provide a Vietnam Bonus.
In my Budget Message two weeks from now, I will identify additional legislative priorities.
That Message will deal in detail with education, corrections, welfare, the environment, and the other basic issues confronting our people.
I stated at the outset of this Message that this session of the Legislature is faced with a mandate unique in Minnesota history. I know that you can meet and fulfill that mandate, for this session is itself unique in the annals of our Legislature.
This uniqueness goes beyond even the unprecedented alignment of the caucuses. It goes beyond partisan allegiance and relates more fundamentally to the kind of men and women who now serve in both our Houses.

I don't believe that any session of our Minnesota Legislature has ever been composed of as high a percentage of new members as this one. I don't believe that any session has been as youthful. I know that no other session has had as many women members.
This newness, this freshness provides us with a special opportunity to demonstrate to the people of Minnesota that "Government works ... and it works for them."
That is what this session is uniquely qualified to do,. To fail would be tragic, to succeed would be to found a whole new era in our public life.
So let us begin this historic session knowing that the only restraints on progress are timidity and doubt. Let our vision be worthy of our mandate. Let each horizon become a threshold.
Let this be a session in which government does work for the people. Starting now.
Thank you.

Mr. Speaker Mr. President members of the minnesota legislature judges of the minnesota supreme court distinguished guests and fellow citizens of minnesota:
Yesterday you reconvened for the final weeks of the 68th legislative session that began more than a year ago.
This is not the beginning of your deliberations.
Nor will they end in these few weeks. For the work you take up again today is the continuation of anew approach to the legislative process in minnesota a recognition that responsive government requires our constant attention.

you are not assembled here after months of rest} but after months of hard work.
The times demand that kind of devotion.
It would be easy to be discouraged today} for this is a dark and frustrating time.
Many americans are pessimistic. Many americans are losing faith--not just in government} but in nearly all the institutions of our economic and political system.
That is not difficult to understand. For most} it is a struggle just to meet the payroll} or pay all the bills and make ends meet. Nine out of ten americans believe they will be worse off next year than they are now.
They do not believe government--or any institution--will help.
Still in the aftermath of a senseless war} they now see the blatant misuse of power in our national public life.

it is tempting to call this crisis national-for it is. But we dare not use that fact as an excuse. We must not evade our own responsibility or squander our opportunity to help the nation find its way.
So the question before us today is what we can do in minnesota in these final legislative weeks to address these problems and to bring back confidence. That question comes at a time when we are faced by the most frustrating single element of the crisis
our overpowering concern continues,to be the shortage of energy.
We still lack basic information that we know we can rely on.
The facts seem to change almost every day on any part of the problem you might ask about.
After.All this time the magnitude of the problem ranges from zero to disaster depending on who is describing it at the moment.
Congressman john zwach expressed the frustration of all of us when he said last week:
Hi get as many conflicting reports as anybody else. We have to rely too much on oil companies. I think they tell us what they want to tell."

our federal energy coordinator bill simon has ordered a federal audit of supply information among the oil companies. It is the only way he says to find out the truth about supplies and price increases.
Two weeks ago in the new york times anthony lewis felt the crisis was so critical that he called for a program to put all our motorists on buses and bicycles.
But on the very same page of the same newspaper on the same day christopher rand said there was no crisis at all plenty of energy for everybody. His article was headlined "oil oil everywhere."
as we address the energy priority in this legislative session there are no proven model programs for states to install. But we do know several truths here in minnesota.
We have been incredibly wasteful as individuals and a nation.
With six percent of the world's population we consume more than a third of the world's energy each year'.
There is another truth: Our american love affair with the automobile has starved mass transit . Blinded us while the railroads abandoned this country and crippled intercity bus service.

we are overly dependent on the automobile. In this state there are nearly two automobiles in operation for each family.
Too many drive cars when it's not necessary. Too many students drive short distances to school. Too many people still choose to drive alone.
But even these truths are not the whole story. Our crisis is not due to waste alone.
During november of 1972approximately 177 million gallons of gasoline and 133 million gallons of heating oil were sold in minnesota. One year later in november of 1973 the number of gallons sold was just about the same.
But not the price per gallon. That was up -50 percent for heating oil and 30 percent for gasoline. And those prices are still rising.
Last year 1200 service stations closed their doors. Ladies and gentlemen that's 1200 in minnesota not america. Almost all small independent businessmen.
But not everybody has been suffering. The profits of the major international oil companies for just the third quarter of 1973 alone were up as much . As 91 percent over the year before.

so profits are up and competition is down. I don't believe that was done to help us through the winter.
That is another truth we know.
We also know that some will try to use the energy shortage as an excuse to abandon our effort to provide a cleaner environment for our children.
That is not the answer. And we will not let it happen.
One further truth: Our people have already shown that they are willing to help and sacrifice-if it's really needed and everybody does it together.
These are all facts we rely upon.
And so our goals in minnesota are clear and essential:
It is our job as astate to protect our " people with all the strength we have.
It is our job to keep our people working and our farmers farming.
It is our job to preserve the ability of industry and small business to support a strong minnesota economy.

and it is our job as astate to pay more thoughtful attention to the future to stop waste and maintain the fragile energy balance that supports our prosperity and our quality of life.
We need information. We need to make ourselves heard in washington. We need to develop a state energy policy.
And to achieve those things we have nowhere to turn but to ourselves.
That is why i. Re-emphasize my support today for the creation of a department of energy as provided in legislation authored by representative willard munger and senators alec olson and win borden. I am grateful for the leadership they are providing.
We need a strong visible permanent agency to develop information and recommend policy. We must give it some authority over the growth and conservation of energy supplies in our state. It must draw together . The expert knowledge and efforts of all our great public and private institutions.
I urge the passage of this legislation. We must get on with the job.

we must also respond to the federal legislation requiring speed limits that do not exceed 55 miles per hour on our state highways. And as more federal requirements are seti we have a continuing responsibility to cooperate.
It is also essential to give our school districts the flexibility they need to adjust to energy conservation practices and meet shortages that may develop. And we need to clarify the authority of our state executive council to deal with emergencies.
Finally we must take direct steps to reduce our excessive reliance on the automobile.
We must get people out of automobiles.
But that means getting as many people as possible into community transit systems not only in the twin cities metropolitan area but all across the state.
We cannot accomplish that in a single week. But we cannot accomplish it at all without providing more state support.'
the basic issue is,whether we should use state funds to improve public transportation.

only 54 percent of minnesota's population is concentrated in the 13 communities with mass transit systems. The other 46 percent do not have such transportation available to them.
Now why should senator roger moe from ada or dick fitzsimons from argyle or representative neil haugerud from way down in preston support state funds for transit for city folks?
Their people are not served by community transit. Some would argue that their districts will not benefit.
But it will. I'll tell you why.
Because you want those city drivers to stop using their cars.
If you want to convince a driver in st. Paul or st. Cloud or rochester or moorhead or mankato or duluth to take the bus to work or school or just downtown there must be service that is inexpensive} convenient and comfortable.
That's not the way it is today.

you can't expect people to give up their cars to ride on buses that haven't been built. Along routes that don't exist: Take trains that are no longer in service on roadbeds that are no longer safe.
And so they drive their cars.
Every gallon of gasoline they use in those cars is not available for your tractors farm implements and trucks to plant and cultivate the crops and take the harvest to market.
It is a gallon of gasoline that wasn't saved for a trip to a minnesota resort community.
It is a gallon of gasoline that can't be used to bring merchandise to a small-town minnesota store.
But if we don't use that gasoline in our cars there's a better chance it will be there for farms and factories and businesses.
That is why i urge you to provide $6 million of state funds to improve community transit operations throughout minnesota and explore the possibility of developing them here they do not exist.

this strong commitment to improving community transit operations is a major step we can take in this session to change the way we live in a society where energy conservation is absolutely essential.
Not just for this winter or the next eighteen months. But for the foreseeable future.
In addition i am recommending once again that you give final approval to senator alec olson and representative irv anderson's $200 million highway and transit bonding bill. It not only provides $80 million for community transit: It also provides $120 million to help upgrade unsafe rural highways.
There are no magic buttons for state governments to press. If we do all of these things the energy crisis will not disappear.
But they are a necessary start and now is the time to begin.

the shortage of energy is frustrating and inconvenient and threatening. But it is also an opportunity to improve" the real standards of our living} to strengthen the pattern of our lives.
I know how difficult it may be in the months and years ahead. But in the long run} we will be a stronger state and nation and abetter people as a result of facing up to the energy crisis.
We will be less wasteful and more saving.
The quality of our environment will improve.
We have another commitment to keep before this session ends.
Everyone has been saddened and embarrassed by the revelations of arrogance and illegal activity on the national level that have broken over us during the past months.
No other development has been so responsible for undermining our faith.
Everyone in this chamber--from whatever political persuasion--has been cheated by these events.

everyone here knows that we cannot cast aside their implications.
To the people of this state who are listening to us today i want to emphasize this point.
We have all read a great deal about this national tragedy. But i have been in politics and government for more than sixteen years.
And i know the minnesota republican party is not like that. The minnesota democratic-farmer-labor is not like that.
The men and women who participate in politics in political parties and in government in minnesota are not like that.
Minnesota is not like that. Not in the past not in the present and god willing never in the future.
But we have been flirting with disaster for years in minnesota as well as the nation.
For as i said here a year ago) the way we are forced to finance our election campaigns is a deadly cancer infecting our free election system.

this state of ours has produced more than its share of presidential candidates and national leaders in public life.
We are the nation's model in so many ways.
Now we must exert national leadership in reforming the election process as well.
That means realistic limits on campaign spending.
It means mandatory disclosure of contributions.
It means moving toward broad based public support through the $1.00 check off system.
It means a tough and impartial ethics commission to give the most careful attention to the supervision of elections and the political activities of elected office holders.
The legislation being carried by senators north and keefe and representative tom berg is before you.
No one claims it is perfect or that it should be exempt from reasonable debate.

but we do know that the major thrust of this legislation is both essential and overdue.
Its defeat would be intolerable.
The people of minnesota will not accept excuses. And they should not. There is too much at stake.
We must give our attention to other important legislation as well.
I have a prejudice.
I believe that pride in home ownership is one of the great strengths of our society. Home ownership supports the quality neighborhoods our children deserve.
Nearly 72 percent of our minnesota homes are owned by those who live in them.
People who own their homes have a stake in their neighborhoods and they know it.
Yet this cornerstone of our quality of life is being threatened. Ordinary citizens find it difficult and often impossible today to buy new homes or even improve the homes in which they are living. Federal assistance does not begin to meet this problem.

that is why two months ago senate majority leader coleman and house speaker sabo joined me in proposing anew housing rehabilitation program.
A large portion of our minnesota residences are in need of repair. The program we are urging you to pass will provide $100 million in revenue bonds for small housing improvement loans at low interest rates.
There is another important matter on which time is running out.
It was widely predicted last january that this would be the session in which no-fault insurance became law in minnesota. There is still time to do so.
And i very strongly urge you to make this prediction come true. We need no-fault insurance--we need a reduction in the premiums our people pay.
Another area that requires action this
year is metropolitan planning and development.
Let me express my gratitude for the great time and effort that has been given to questions of metropolitan government by this legislature since i noted a year ago that such attention was long overdue.

i am well aware that there are important legitimate differences on questions of substance---on metropolitan issues that still divide the senate and house committees.
Answers to such basic questions should not come easily. But they should come soon--and in the spirit of compromise that marks the governmental process.
Many of our metropolitan concerns require immediate attention.
We must find a way to help communities develop additional parks and open spaces before the spaces and the opportunity disappear.
And the energy crisis demands that this legislature commit itself to the preparation of a comprehensive metro transit plan to be reviewed and approved when you meet again in 1975.
In the end, effective action on these metropolitan questions will help to reassure our citizens that state government can respond to the common needs.

we should also establish an independent board for the selection of design architects and engineers for state projects as senator coleman and representative irv anderson are proposing.
We should insure the protection of parochial school tax credits that have already been granted and explore alternative ways of keeping a strong dual system of public and private education in our state.
Under the new federal income plan for the aged blind and disabled we should supplement payments for all who meet our previous state standards of eligibility
we need some immediate capacity plan the future shape of our human services system in minnesota.
We should consider a state program of low interest loans for community health and mental health facilities including group homes.
We should make certain that needy people do not suffer financial losses under the general assistance reforms provided in 1973.

we should consider state regulation of our minnesota utilities.
The list could be still longer. I know that you will give attention to many of these items and others on your own agendas.
But i ask you to concentrate on the priorities:
To act with deliberate speed and minimum partisanship.
I feel privileged to have worked with a legislature that dared so much and has already achieved so much.
It is tempting to list your record--the senior citizen tax freeze, help for the handicapped, environmental protection, the veterans bonus, significant consumer legislation, the minimum wage and public employee bargaining laws, restrictions on corporate farming, more openness in the conduct of government at all levels, maintenance of fair school finance and property tax relief.
Our business today is what you still must dol not what you have done.

our people appreciate the effort you have made.
For minnesotans are aware of what kind of state and what kind of people we are.
The real strength of our state springs from the talent1 energy and humane commitment of our people.
I am optimistic about our future.
Our people are resilient and responsive and realistic.
They can live with the truth.
They do not accept easy rhetoric and impossible promises. But they do recognize and support performance.
They have heard the warnings of these troubled days.
And so must we.

Dear Mr. Speaker, Mr. Majority Leader, and Members of the 69th Session of the Minnesota Legislature:
As you reconvene for the remaining weeks of the 69th Session of the Minnesota Legislature, your extensive interim activities have been well reported, and the substance of important legislation before you is well-known to all of us and to the people of Minnesota. For that reason, I have not asked for an opportunity to appear before you to deliver a formal State of the State message, as I did in 1974.
It is helpful to have available the Senate Majority Caucus list of priority concerns, and I am also pleased to have had the opportunity to discuss the coming session with the leadership of both houses. You can be certain that my office will cooperate with your wish for a brief session, including the deadlines for committee action established by the Legislative Coordinating Committee. Although the business before this session has' major significance for many of our people, I certainly agree with you that there is no need for a long session this year.
Before summarizing those legislative items that deserve attention, in my judgment, it seems desirable to report briefly on the state's financial condition at this time.
As you know, the Department of Finance and the Department of Revenue have reported that state revenue for the first six months of the current fiscal year was approximately $32 million
above the projections adopted by the Legislature in its 1975 budget

considerations, but an uncertain farm income picture raises the possibility that income tax revenues will fall $30 million to $40 million below estimates for the remaining months of the fiscal year.
Further information will become available next month for use by the Legislature. At this point, there is no reason to modify the Legislature's previous projections of state revenue available for the biennium. Overall Federal budgeting for the 1976-1977 fiscal year, including the prospects for general revenue-sharing, is still undetermined. The condition of the nation's economy remains uncertain for the same period. Projections for the second year of our budgeting period must therefore be considered uncertain.
Based on 1975 projections, we can look forward toa balanced state budget if we continue to monitor expenditures very carefully. The 1975 Legislature concluded its work with approximately $65 million of projected revenue remaining unspent, but with bills totalling approximately $63.5 million awaiting final passage.
Of these appropriations, the Legislative Advisory Commission, as you know, has anticipated immediate 1976 passage of H.F.l741, funding semi-state agencies, and has provided funds to the affected agencies on a contingency basis. Appropriation of approximately $9.6 million for that purpose will leave approximately $53.8 million of projected revenues for the biennium available for 1976 decisions.
That amount represents less than 1.2 percent of total projected revenues for the 1975-1977 biennium. Since Minnesota law provides that our budget must be balanced, our remaining resources are obviously very limited.
In addition to the semi-state appropriation, two other bills constitute items for priority action, in my judgment.
The first is H.F. 1199, providing approximately $7 million for drug and alcohol outreach and treatment. I support the proposed modification of this legislation that would use a portion of the funds to supplement 1975 appropriations for our state system of

The Honorable Martin Olav Sabo The Honorable Nicholas D. Coleman Page 3 January 21, 1976
local detoxification centers. There has been excellent and serious participation by chemical dependency specialists in government and private agencies in developing this legislation and recommending its outreach procedures. I urge its quick passage, with the modifications that have been developed.
The other major priority for 1976 action, in my jUdgment, is H.F. 1137, which provides approximately $40 million for additional efforts by our Minnesota Housing Finance Agency to make decent housing available where it is needed most. In my Inaugural and Budget addresses a year ago, I strongly recommended such legislation and I hope the Legislature will quickly approve this important improvement in our state housing program.
It is also vital to make two adjustments in existing legislation to meet problems that have become apparent since you met in 1975. Our state unemployment tax must be increased by one-tenth of one percent so that we continue to qualify for interest-free loans from the federal government until a recovering economy restores the level of our state unemployment compensation fund. And we must change a provision of the 1975 tax relief legislation that unintentionally disqualified senior citizens in subsidized housing from receiving property tax relief as renters.
Other important legislation now in final stages includes S.F. 919, to improve our environmental permit processes; S.F. 1308, to clear up a number of problems related to public water drainage in our state; H.F. 1206, establishing land use grants for local governments; and H.F. 645, establishing local community health programs in our state. Within the financial resources available, and considering other needs which may develop during the session, these measures deserve your continuing support .
. For five years, the legislative and executive branches have been working to bring together our fragmented transportation efforts under a Department of Transportation, and I hope that action can be completed this year if possible. The Legislature should also give serious consideration to a special state bonding program to provide much-needed repairs to the most seriously deteriorating highway bridges in our state, and I reiterate my support for up to $200 million of bonding for that purpose. We must face up to this need sooner or later.

Throughout your 1975 deliberations substantial committee attention has been devoted to the question of legislative, executive and judicial salaries in Minnesota. As you know, I have proposed that the Legislature create a special commission, like the one that is operating successfully in the state of Michigan, to establish these salaries with review by the Legislature. However, whether that structure is adopted or not, it is vital to reach consensus on salaries this year for all three branches of our state government, so that reasonable pay adjustments for state government service can be put into effect. Timing is especially critical for legislative compensation, since adjustments cannot be granted for members of the 1977-1978 Legislature unless they are acted upon this year.
As chairman of Minnesota's Bicentennial observance, the Lieutenant Governor of Minnesota will be proposing small state subsidies for Minnesota communities that undertake special Bicentennial observances. I recommend that an appropriate amount of state funds be provided for this purpose.
I also urge your favorable consideration of proposed legislation to establish a Legislative Commission on the Economic Status of Women.
Many other matters will be before you in the next few weeks, including possible action to help insure that our major league sports teams and our major league arts institutions will be available to our people; proposed energy conservation requirements; changes in our criminal sentencing procedures; the adequacy of our maximum security prison" facilities; the unfortunate availability of alcoholic beverages to high school students; the availability of bilingual and bicultural education for students who have difficulty with the English language; revisions of our laws governing nursing home regulation; railroad improvements, and metropolitan land use planning, among others. Thoughtful attention has been given to these issues during interim meetings of legislative committees. They deserve your continued attention and action if time permits.
The wisdom of our flexible session arrangement is demonstrated by the opportunity it gives us this year to devote additional and thoughtful legislative and executive consideration to matters of significance to the people of Minnesota. The Legislature appears

well-prepared for the remaining weeks of the session. The major issues that require attention are relatively few, but we are fortunate to have the opportunity to address them now.
My office and my staff will continue to be available to provide information and assistance as the members of the Legislature desire. We join you in anticipating a brief but productive completion of the agenda of the 69th Session of the Minnesota State Legislature.
With warmest regards.
