Mr. speaker, Mr. President, Mr. Chief Justice, members of the Court, Constitutional Officers, members of the Legislature and my fellow Minnesotans:
Opening statement: War in the Middle East; deaths of Karl Rolvaag and Gus Donhowe

Richly blessed with rivers, lakes, streams, major cultural center - agriculture and agribusiness.
Spawned 3M - gave birth to large scale computers at Control Data and Cray Research.
Our University became a major research center guiding the way to everything from taconite to human transplants.
Our people have won awards ranging from Nobel Prizes to Pulitizers to National Athletic Championships.

We are a healthy, productive people with our roots and

traditions deep in Minnesota soil.
Our pioneering stock is still with us, we are adventurers , bright, brawny and optimistic.


Now that quality of life is threatened. It is not just the recession or war, but rather driven by our sense of anxiety. We are uncertain about our future.
a. Real income has declined for the past three years. People are working hard and actually earning less. They see us slipping in everything from school test scores to political ethics to down grading of living standards.
b. Jobs have peen slowly disappearing along North Dakota and South Dakota- and now along Iowa. Wisconsin has now become a real job threat as they have emerged as a lower cost state.
c. Competition for jobs is a real fear. But the real anxiety goes beyond that point. Our values of prudence have peen assaulted. Assaulted by a culture that has focused on short-term greed. The "What's in it for me" philosophy has prevailed.
The 80's may we be remembered as the decade of greed. It permeated all institutions and all sectors of life 

Now one day after we honor Dr. Martin Luther King, we have an opportunity to put all that aside and do what King's life stood for an appeal to the best that lies within us all. We must challenge the past or become a prisoner of it. I say that people want a "new beginning" with a focus on excellence, truth and a summons to duty.

You and I sought the opportunity to serve. We told the people that we had the power and courage to change things Ñ now. Let us live up to that promise of change.
All too often, government holds itself out as an agent of change, but that is not always true. The fact is we tend to dislike change because it compels us to get out of our comfortable rut. The status quo is comfortable.
Politically we created a system where some 400 units of government come to st. Paul and plead for more money. There is very little discussion about goals or objectives or performance - primarily just the need for more money to continue the past.

a. For six years during the 80's we ranked third in total government spending growth 

b. Spending grew 35 percent higher, than personal income; 42 percent higher than the gross state product; 57 percent higher than inflation.

c. During this timeframe, had we spent at the rate of inflation, we would now have $9 billion.

Neal Peirce last week changed his tune about Minnesota. No longer were we the state that worked or the Dynamo of Reform, but another one that co~sted down "fiscal Easy street" during the 1980's.
We avoided the tough decisions.

We followed the lead of the federal government by spending money

that we did not have and pretending to the people that all was well.

"Trust us" was our motto. We, on the state level, authorized over

$900 million of new debt, a 22 percent increase since 1988.

Cities, townships and counties increased their debt 54 percent

since 1983 -- from $2.8 billion to a whopping $4.3 billion.

We favored soccer stadiums over child nutrition, community

centers and swimming pools over classrooms while we transferred record

levels of debt to our children. On the operating side of the budget,

we favored spending over discipline.


Since July of 1989, we on the state level have been spending

$800,000 per day more than we have been taking in. That comes to over

$24 million a month. And when leaders like Gene Merriam and Duane

Benson said "fix it," we ignored them and pretended all was well.

So we have a past that is rich with blessings and some

short-sighted behavior that embarrasses us. I say, challenge the

past. Let us go forth and see the challenges ahead as opportunities
and not as pits of hopelessness and anguish.

Let us do what we told our people we would do -- lead with

intelligence and courage.

Our first challenge is the current budget. We are now spending,

as I indicated, $800,000 per day more than we have taken in. If we

chose to ignore this hemorrhaging, we will have spent $600 million

more over the past two years than we took in.

In order to better plan our financial future, t asked a

bipartisan panel of financial experts to evaluate our current

financial situation and make some recommendations.

This Blue Ribbon Panel consisted of former finance commissioners
who served both Democrat and Republican Governors and experts from the
private sector. Their recommendation was unanimous - cut $197 million
from the current bUdget right now and then reduce anticipated spending
by $1.8 billion in the budget for the next two year period. I think
this is good advice.
It is tempting to go into the state's $550 million emergency
reserve fund. but that would be like dipping into a savings account in order to pay for a life style we cannot afford. It would simply be
another postponement of the problem. But let me also share with you certain facts:

1. We have this problem largely because we spent more than we earned. Raising taxes or depleting our savings is not the
answer.
2. The recession is saucer-shaped and recovery will be slow.

3. Any tampering with the reserve fund will attract the attention of the bond rating agencies and possibly place our bond ratings and those of local governments in jeopardy.

4. We have an additional $1.8 billion problem that we will deal with in February but suffice it to say, prudence says "protect the reserves." 

No, the only choice is to reduce our current expenditures.


Now I know that there will be cries of protest. We have built a system of government where spending is favored over prudent behavior. But, let us look at the facts:

1. Every state that surrounds us is more tax and job competitive.

2. The Great Lakes Governors met last week and not one indicated
a willingness to increase taxes. They all know the value of
jobs.

3. As Joanell and I traveled through Minnesota this summer and

fall, the message was clear - reduce government spending and

reduce taxes. The people are tightening their belts and they

want us to do the same.

Let us do it willingly and without complaint.

I am pleased with the speed with which the Legislature is processing the reduction bill. It shows that we can and will work together, always putting the long-term interests of people first.

Now let me briefly touch on another matter of great urgency workers compensation reform. Three times this Legislature courageously passed a reform measure and three times it was not signed into law. Rest assured that I will work with you to achieve passage.

Let us send out a bipartisan signal to all those who create
jobs. We want our costs of doing business in Minnesota to be competitive with other progressive states because we want jobs and we want more jobs for our people.
If we can just discipline our spending and make job creation costs competitive with other states, believe me, this will be a most successful legislative session.

But I think we can do more.

I. First of all, we can stop micro-managing our entire

governmental system. Federal - state - Local. It is too costly and

gets in the way of solution and lacks political integrity.

Local Government - day care -- education - environment

Our budgets are line-item. We must continue process toward performance based budgeting. Representative Simoneau and Senator erriam have led the way in these reforms. I commend the Legislature. Let us focus on outcome and value of our services.

Focus on Education - We may be short on dollars but not on reforms:

1. We will not run local schools from st. Paul. Site-based management will be our goal.
Local Government - Maximize flexibility and creativity. We are hamstringing our teachers. Let teachers do what they do best - teach

2. A new contract - children - parents - teachers - community state - accountability and results.
3. Train children for jobs that exist - build an understanding between schools and business so that a natural relationship occurs always with a focus on excellence. Our children must know that there is a linkage between high grades and good jobs.
4. Seventy-four percent of our teenagers are in the labor force. This is the highest in the United States. This is both good news/bad news situation.

a. Work ethic is strong,"
b. Students who work are often tired - they are lulled into false sense of security. They must know the value of a high school diploma. The primary role of the student is to
study and work hard. Jobs are secondary.

III. Long term property tax reform: 1. commercial-industrial property tax rates are the highest outside of New York City.

2. We must work toward eliminating the third tier of property taxes for homeowners. More progressive than the income tax and very punitive.

IV. New Partnerships

Now we have a host of concerns that compel government to think
differently. Over the past twenty years, government has been the

provider of first choice and not the provider of last resort.

Somehow we have decided that we have the capacity to solve all

problems. We have encouraged people to seek a government remedy

without first exploring other options. The result is we have gotten

ourselves into activities well. beyond government's role and ability.

We have subsidized homes for the ver,y wealthy, thrown enormous

subsidies at out of state businesses in the hopes of luring them into
Minnesota, and just recently disclosed a tax subsidy to a nightclub

promoting nude dancing.

Government must define itself and its mission. We must agree

that the states who know where they are going are the ones most likely

to take the right direction. After all, as w learned from Alice in
Wonderland, if you do not know where you are going, any road will get
you there. We know where we are going.

We are going to make Minnesota more job competitive with other states. Four years from now I hope we will read stories in Wisconsin

newspapers about how Minnesota is attracting jobs instead of vice

versa.

That means we have to hone in on government costs, put logic and

fairness in our regulatory system, and focus on our vision for the

future by protecting and enhancing our assets and overcoming our

liabilities. The first step will be the creation of a private-public
partnership that will help define:

a. Government relations so we can define the function of
government, where that function ought to be located, the value
of that function. In other words, specifically define goals and
objectives and accountability,

b. Review governmental costs and work with management on instituting the efficiencies necessary to provide the tax payer with a real quality service at an affordable price.
It is our intent in that this partnership, which we will call
the Committee on Reform and Governmental Efficiency -- CORAGE -- will work closely with the Dyrstad commission of local government so that all have input into the process. Rest assured, Minnesotans want cost-efficient government.

..Our concept of new partnerships ,

also extends to the one between

the Governor and Lt. Governor. I said at the outset that Joanell

Dyrstad will be a spokesperson for this administration and I meant it.

Minnesota has always been known as a state filled with people of

vision and creativity. If there ever was a moment in our state

history when a sense of vision was absolutely essential, it is now.

Our state has, as I have outlined, a serious short-term bUdget

problem, and we will deal with that. But over the next four years, we

will be looking beyond the present and into the future of this state.
We must become geared up to meet the long-range challenges of
interstate and global competition. We need to reestablish goals and

form long term objectives to reach those goals. We can begin by

forging new partnerships and creating new structures that will take

Minnesota into the 21st century.

We know we must change the way state and local governments

operate. The relationship between the federal government and state
and local governments has changed. Federal revenue sharing no longer
exists. Federal support to pay for major new, as well as ongoing
social initiatives, is no longer a reality. We recognize that and we

have and will adapt to it.

In 1932, Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis coined the phrase "laboratories of democracy." He was talking about state governments and the idea, as he put it, that "a single courageous state may, if its citizens choose, serve as a laboratory; and try novel social and economic experiments without risk to the rest of the county." 

A laboratory of democracy is what Minnesota must become over the next four years if we are to make the fundamental changes that are vital to the social welfare and economic health of our state.
One experiment we will be focusing on is the forming of new partnerships and an examination of existing ones. state support of local government activity is being reduced. It is a challenge local government can rise to if they are given the flexibility to do so. Local government has adapted well before and will do so again. The removal of unnecessary mandates and the improvement in tha working relationship between state agencies and local governments will be a big step in improving communication and strengthening that relationship.
Municipalities have positioned themselves well with $183 million in reserves; counties have $245 million in reserve. They are well aware of the impact of taxes on the creation of new jobs. Many Minnesota firms have moved across the border to Wisconsin and more are posturing themselves to do so because of taxes; and, Governor Thompson has pledged "no new taxes."
We need to realistically face that competition. To do that, then, we must design new management techniques, restructure bureaucracies, empower our employees and instill a new dedication to making state government and local government consumer-oriented and user-friendly.


It is our responsibility to listen to the taxpayers, not the tax-spenders. Our consumers will tell us what they need and are willing to pay for. As I have said, we are challenging the past. 
We need to create new partnerships with the people of our state

as well. We need to bring down the barriers to participation in the

economy, whether they be poverty, racial and/or sexual discrimination,

illiteracy, access to child care or government regulation.

We need to start early and focus on prevention. This means

supporting programs that reduce unwanted pregnancies, provide access

to pre-natal care, and teach parents how to do a good job of raising

their children.

We will be focusing on day care. We are not going to be using building codes to keep churches and synagogues out of the day care
business any more. If government cannot solve the problem, the least

we can do is to help those who can.

And our administration would rather spend $2,600 to enroll a

child in Head Start for a year than pay $30,000 a year down the line

to house that person in a state prison.

We need to forge new partnerships between education and social
service organizations. Many of our children just are not ready to
learn when they come to school.

Some are not ready because they live in homes where domestic

violence so scars them that they lose the capacity to relate to other

people.

We have good laws to protect battered families, but we need to

improve enforcement. A "cooling off" period may help when someone in the family has been arrested for domestic abuse or for violation of an order for protection.


Had such a policy been in place for Kathryn Hebert (A-BER), we
perhaps would not have had to face the horror of finding her body in a
shallow grave, and her children would still have a mother.

Children who are not ready to learn, for whatever reason, will

not learn, no matter how talented and dedicated are their teachers.

Schools need to be able to concentrate their efforts on teaching

children. The entire community, each and every one of us, must assume

responsibility for each and every child in our state.

Luckily, we will not have to do it all ourselves. This is one
of the great things about the people of Minnesota: People want to help. They want to pitch in. They want the barriers removed.

We are fortunate to live in a state where volunteering is an

integral part of our culture and heritage. Fifty-eight percent of

Minnesota adults give an average of four hours each week to help

others. The Minnesota Office of Volunteer Services calculates that

Minnesotans contribute about $4.2 billion dollars worth of services

every year.

Minnesotans are extremely creative in developing working

volunteer partnerships. Churches, businesses, schools and clubs are

reaching out. We are asking you to join us by saying -- "yes, I can

do that"

I can pitch garbage in a can so someone else does not have to pick it up. I can recycle to save the environment. I can volunteer to help paint someone's house, or deliver a meal, or assist in my child's school. I can lend that helping hand.

You and I must become participants in our society, relying less on government to solve every problem and more on ourselves.


By involving our people and our communities and our institutions

in new partnerships, we can create a new model for state government --

one that can provide leadership and vision not only here in Minnesota,

but elsewhere in the country.

We will also create new partnerships with business. We need to

create an entrepreneurial climate in this state, where public and

private sector leaders -- aided, not hindered, by state government

can come together and pursue new ventures, start new companies, and

create new jobs for Minnesotans.


We are excited about forming partnerships with young businesses

which will grow and expand and become our Fortune 500 companies of

tomorrow.

Minnesota is well known for the ones we have now -- 3M,

Northwest Airlines, General Mills, and so many others -- and we must

keep them strong. But the state's future is being creative right now

with new start-ups -- companies that export products and import jobs.

I have asked some of these people to join us, to give you

examples of this spirit. There are many more. These are people who

have taken small companies and expanded them through personal

initiative and commitment to Minnesota.

Glen Taylor, head of Taylor Corporation of North Mankato, which now employs 3,000 people in the Mankato area; and
Greg Herrick, head of Zeos International of New Brighton, a manufacturer of personal computers; T. Michael Clarke, CEO of KATUN Corporation of Bloomington, a leading supplier of copier and printer parts;
Ron Eibensteiner, president of Mirror Technologies of Roseville,
a manufacturer of peripheral equipment for computers;
Kay Fredericks, president of Trend Enterprises, which designs
and manufactures educational products.

Will you people stand up and be recognized. These people

represent the future of our state, and there are many more like them.

What will it take for businesses like these to succeed, and for

more just like them to grow?

Before we do anything, we must get the fiscal crisis behind us, by reforming workers comp and the commercial-industrial property tax system.

Beyond that, we need to create a competitive environment, an

environment that is at least competitive with states with whom we

share a border.

Last fall the people of Minnesota chose us to be their agents of

change. We intend to fulfill that legacy. Now I would like to touch

on a few of our priorities.


within state government, we intend,to create a climate where

there is equal opportunity for all Minnesotans. We have asked Linda

Barton, Commissioner of Employee Relations, to begin immediately to

develop a training program for all state employees to increase

awareness and sensitivity to human rights issues. Let no one think

for one moment that enduring sexual harassment falls within the scope

of their employment. It does not.

When it comes to the environment, we need to start with the

notion that we are stewards of our land. Our children deserve to inherit a state which reflects care and respect for the environment.


Our priority this session will be to work for passage of the no-net-loss wetlands bill. This is not a new proposal, but it is one
that has never reached the Governor's desk to be signed into law.

We stand herb tonight to tell you that we support the

no-net-loss wetlands bill and ask you to work together on a

bi-partisan basis to pass it.

Representative Willard Munger, you are the dean of this body and

we are asking you to join hands with Marcus Marsh and get this bill to

my desk as soon as possible.

Also, I want to hold those who pollute our environment
accountable for the cleanup. There is also a fairness issue here.

Environmental violations must be dealt with fairly and with uniform

penalties against all violators, and we will work toward that end.

In the next four years, we believe there is much to be gained

from reorganizing both the Pollution Control Agency and the Department

of Natural Resources. We would like to see more resources directed to

field work throughout the state and less to "paper shufflers" here in

St. Paul.

The 1990 Legislature passed a landmark law called the toxic

pollution prevention act. It was designed to encourage businesses and

individuals to reduce the amount of dangerous chemicals released into

the air, water and ground.

Representative Munger, I pledge that our administration will

vigorously enforce your law. Whenever we deal with natural resources, we must remember that we do not inherit these resources from our parents but rather we borrow them from our children. Our children are well ahead of us on

this issue.

We intend to forge new partnerships in protecting out

environment. In doing so, we must strike a delicate balance and see:

mutual harmony among the tourism industry, sportsmen- and -women,

business, and those who wish to preserve the serenity of a clear river

or a majestic forest.

Another priority of ours is affordable health care for every

Minnesotan. We recognize that this is an ambitious undertaking, and

we will not be able to turn our full attention to it until our bUdget

crisis is solved. But we will be proposing a pilot project in the budget we submit

for the next two years that will begin to address this important

matter.

However, we in government are not 100 percent of the answer to

this problem either. If everyone in Minnesota would make the

commitment to stop smoking, to exercise regularly and to eat more

healthy foods we could make enormous reductions in the cost of health

care.

We as individuals must begin to recognize that we have an

obligation.

Once the budget situation is under control, we would also like

to find a way to make higher education affordable to our citizens in

an era of spiralling college costs. Higher education should not be

out of the reach of so many people, and the Edvest program I proposed

earlier is one way to make college more affordable.
For two marvelous weeks in January, the eye of the world focused on Minnesota. They saw our Metrodome, our ice palace, and felt the warmth and glow of our people.
We showed the world the special "can do" attitude of Minnesotans. Who else would celebrate winter by engaging in outdoor competitions of every kind, castle building, sculpture making, softball on ice, cross-country skiing, skating and snowmobiling.
That "can do" attitude was not born in 1992. It was forged in our earliest days when the first pioneers began to settle here. They built farms, mined ore, logged and fished. Minnesota was the rugged frontier that attracted those who understood the risk in opportunity and the hard work in success.
In 1847 a 30 year-old teacher and missionary named Harriet Bishop traveled alone from Vermont to create the first public school in St Paul. She traveled by lake, land and river through the wilderness, and made the last leg of the trip up the Mississippi by canoe with two Dakota Indian women.
At that time, St. Paul was no more than a cluster of log huts along the Mississippi. Harriet Bishop's first school house was a former blacksmith shop in downtown Saint Paul. Rats and snakes plagued her mud plastered log schoolhouse and she had only a few school books.
She also started Minnesota's first Sunday school class. By the third Sunday she had attracted 25 children with such diverse backgrounds that an interpreter was needed who spoke English, Dakota and French.

At times Miss Bishop became discouraged with her new life on the frontier. She wondered whether her words were having the smallest effect on these young minds. Yet she persevered.
And her students, and the students of other pioneer teachers ultimately built the Minnesota we know today.
· They founded our first mills, our first companies and developed our farms
· They created our education system, our parks system and our transportation system.
· They built our network of working, successful communities.
The quality of life we enjoy today is the legacy of their efforts. And it is now time for us to decide what legacy we will pass on to our children and the generations of Minnesotans that will follow them. Instead of the challenge of the frontier, we are now facing the challenge of a world in change.
Today our immediate focus is on the recession. It has affected all of us. Many Minnesotans have lost jobs and families are stretching their days and their pocketbooks to make ends meet. You do not need to be told that Minnesota's economy has seen better days. You know the reality.
But as a people, we have overcome much greater obstacles in our history. Many of us lived through the Great Depression. I can recall the end of the Depression when my mother would collect bags of discarded flour to bake bread and cookies to sell so that our family could pay the rent. It was not an easy time, but because our faith was strong and our values true - all of us endured.
As recently as the early 1980s Minnesota weathered a recession even more severe than the one we face today. Tens of thousands more people were unemployed then, and farm income fell to the lowest level since the Great Depression. But again we recovered, just as we will recover together from the hard times we are now facing.
This recession, like all recessions, will have limited duration. And we will recover because the fabric of our society is solid, our work ethic is strong, and we will stand together to make the sacrifices necessary to pull ourselves and our neighbors through. Tonight I will outline some of the actions we can take to attack the recession, and start putting Minnesotans back to work now.
But I am also convinced that we are facing a challenge much more significant than the recession. It is a challenge that goes to the heart of our tradition as an immigrant society.
For decades, the triumph of our lives has been the ability to give each new generation a better quality of life than the one we enjoyed. That ascending ladder has been a central part of the American experience. Today it is widely accepted that our children will be the first generation in American history to receive less from their parents than the generation before - the first generation to have fewer opportunities than we had when we were growing up.
More of our young people are worried about the future than ever before - 77%, according to one recent study. They worry because we have convinced them that they should. We lack confidence in the long-term future, and we are teaching our children to doubt
Yet in our hearts we all believe the United States and Minnesota in particular are the best places in the world to live and raise a family. What we need to do is remind ourselves of a simple fact - the state of the state will be whatever we choose to make it
The state of the state will be whatever we choose to make it

We can leave our children a state that is substantially stronger than the one w~ inherited - just as our parents did - if we are willing to draw upon the strength and integrity that have historically made this state and its people so exceptional. Children are our most important asset and we can measure our progress in the way our decisions affect their future.
The key to assuring that strength lies in identifying our objectives and making the decisions necessary to achieve them - no matter how tough those choices might be. It lies in recognizing that the good of Minnesota's people is more important than the good of any candidate or political party - and toning down political rhetoric so we can concentrate on the needs of our people.
Even amidst the rancor of the last legislative session, some very important things were accomplished:
· We identified K-12 education and early learning as priorities and - despite the need to close a $2 billion dollar shortfall we increased funding for both of these programs.
· We passed the most comprehensive wetlands protection bill in the nation.
· We advanced the cause of children by increasing funding for early childhood programs by $14 million.
· We increased funding for our children's health plan to allow coverage for 24,000 more children.
· We sent a signal to job creators by reducing commercial and industrial property tax rates.
· We adopted the nation's strongest grade crossing safety legislation.
· We began the difficult process of property tax reform by eliminating the 3% tax classification. And we had to do that because senior. citizens on fixed incomes were literally being taxed out of their homes.
· And we solved a $2 billion dollar shortfall without the strikes, massive lay-offs, shutdowns and costly special sessions that plagued so many other states.
To the members of the legislature who worked on those achievements, I say thank you for putting the future of Minnesota first.
The challenge of defining the Minnesota of the 90s is just beginning. Next week we start a legislative session that provides us with an eight week opportunity to look at our future and shape the state of the state on issues like health care access, education, and jobs. We can also squander the opportunity presented by that session with partisan rhetoric and political debate. It's our choice, and you and I need to work together to take the high road and make this session make a difference.
Nowhere can we make a more significant difference than by improving the quality of education.
When I was young, my immigrant parents told us education was the great leveling factor. They were right. Education brought my brothers and me out of poverty. It has brought generations of Americans out of poverty and it remains the single most reliable ticket to self-sufficiency and a rewarding life.
Among the fifty states, Minnesota's K-12 education system is universally recognized as an innovative leader. But unfortunately, being a leader in the nation is no longer good enough.
When our children graduate they will not compete simply with people from Iowa or North Dakota. Even if they never leave Minnesota - they will compete with students from Asia; Europe, and Canada. And if we expect them to win, we are going to have to change, and make our education system competitive with any in the world.
Minnesota 2000 is a program designed to drive that change. It is a statewide campaign to get every aspect of every community involved in the education process. It was inspired by an African proverb that states: "It takes an entire village to educate one child." That philosophy is the foundation of Minnesota 2000. Simply put, our goal is to improve education by increasing the level of community involvement.
We have set six ambitious education goals for Minnesota. And we intend to achieve these goals by the year 2000.
· First, all children should start school ready to learn.
· Second, every high school in the state should have a 90 percent graduation rate.
· Third, our students should master challenging academic subjects including English, math, science and geography.
· Fourth, our students must be first in math and science achievement.
· Fifth, every adult should be literate and possess the skills necessary to compete in a global economy.
· And finally, we must remove drugs and violence from our schools.
Our aim is nothing less than raising achievement to world-class levels for all learners. Are these optimistic goals? You bet they are. But they are achievable.

Last fall, 200 teachers, administrators, social workers, clergy, businessmen and. women, civic organizations, volunteers and parents assisted in the planning process for Minnesota 2000. Regional meetings will begin across Minnesota in April. I plan to attend, and I hope you will join me.
It is going to take this kind of effort to get education back where it should be - at the center of family and community life.
Minnesota 2000 defines an exciting vision. And that vision becomes more exciting when we blend it with the work of the children's commission I appointed one year ago.
Teachers tell us that increasing numbers of children are beginning their schooling unready to learn for reasons that have nothing to do with their learning abilities. More and more children are coming to school sick, hungry, tired distracted or abused. Too often TV has become the babysitter. And too often teachers and government are being asked to assume the role of a "parent".
Teachers cannot be expected to teach hungry children, and they cannot be expected to excite the mind of a child with low self-esteem. It's time to give teachers some help rather than blame them for problems over which they have no control.
We also have learned that bureaucracies - no matter how caring - cannot raise our children. We need to recognize that the challenge of learning readiness does not begin on the first day of school. It begins with the parent. We must develop an environment in which children can succeed in a value based system that reflects parental commitment.
Much of what we need to do is simple and accessible to every Minnesota family.
· We can make a point to spend quality time with each child 
· We can turn off the TV and help our children explore the world of reading 
· We can take our children to the zoo, the museum, the art gallery
It is as easy as taking a walk, going sledding or simply talking to one another..
While parents have an obligation to parent, we in government and in the community have an obligation to help responsible families succeed. And there is a great deal more we can do to help.
Minnesota is viewed as the leader in the nation when it comes to effective children's programs. We are not short on programs. We are not short on good programs. But we may be short on the coordination, flexibility and depth needed to turn children's lives around.
That is why we formed a children's commission last year - called Action for Children - to study the lives of young Minnesotans and make recommendations to help the state restructure programs and remove barriers to success for children and their families.
This commission will soon issue its first report which includes a broad range of recommendations, many of which deal with building bridges between programs, parents, children teachers and social workers.
Among the recommendations are: .
· Formation of a Children's Cabinet drawn from the state departments which affect children most. This group would assist in developing children's policies and budgeting children's programs.
· Integration of education, school, health and social services for children of all ages.
· Creation of an information system that is integrated across state agencies so that important information does not get lost when children move from program to program - and so that programs can coordinate their efforts.

The first report from the Children's Commission offers many sound ideas ... but perhaps most important, it brings us to the realization that we cannot isolate education from other problems affecting children. If a child is doing poorly in school - it may have little to do with the child's intelligence and a lot to do with low self-esteem or a serious problem at home. The state of the family reflects the state of the state.
We have the capacity to improve. We can take advantage of innovative programs like Communities-in-Schools - a program that grants funding to schools who bring social service programs into the school setting. And we can transport that model all across Minnesota. It's about time we combined social services and education to help those who need special help while allowing others to pursue their education without distraction.
We can expand our early learning programs such as Head Start. Our objective should be that every child has access to a nutritious breakfast. We must also make certain that every child has access to affordable health care.
When we open doors for children today, we open doors for the remainder of their lives.
But unfortunately, as important as it is for us to provide each child with access to opportunity, these measures alone will not build a strong future for the state if our children have to leave Minnesota to find the kinds of jobs they have been trained for. And we cannot preserve the unique diversity of our society if children educated in Greater Minnesota are forced to migrate to the Twin Cities to find work.
The truth is that the issues of education and job climate are inseparable. And in Minnesota, our job climate is as weak as our educational system is strong. A recent analysis of the national business climate rated Minnesota the most desirable place in the nation to live. But that same publication rated us as one of the ten worst states in the nation for job growth because of our high taxes, high workers' compensation costs, and a difficult regulatory climate.
9

The job climate issue touches each of our lives because every month, every year, jobs leave this state and Minnesota companies undertake their expansions elsewhere. And no single factor has played a greater role in costing Minnesota jobs than our high workers' compensation costs.
Minnesota workers compensation costs are 35 percent higher than those in Wisconsin, and 43 percent above costs in South Dakota - two of the principal states with which we compete. A major employer in South East Minnesota recently told me that he could save over $300,000 a year simply by moving his company a few hundred yards across the river to Wisconsin. Another bewildered company owner in South West Minnesota showed me how he could cut his workers compensation costs by 70 percent if he moved across the border into Iowa. Fortunately, they chose to stay. Many others chose to leave.
There is no reason the workers' compensation problem cannot be fixed in this legislative session if we have the courage to make the choice. There is a bipartisan proposal now before the legislature that would reform Minnesota's system and bring our costs into line with those of our principal competitors. It would no longer pay people more to stay home than to work. It controls medical costs without requiring additional state subsidies. And it makes the system easier to use and understand for workers who are injured on the job. I support that proposal.
In the late 1980s the legislature three times passed meaningful workers' compensation reform only to have it vetoed by the former Governor. I want to make it very plain that if the legislature passes the bi-partisan reform package, I will sign it. And with joblessness increasing across Minnesota, I cannot think of a reason for failing to act on the bill during this session. There is no more effective way to keep Minnesota jobs in Minnesota.
An equally strong priority for this legislative session is health care reform.
There are few needs as basic as the need for access to affordable health care. You and I are fortunate to live in a national health care center. People travel from around the world to access institutions like Rochester Mayo Clinic and St. Mary's Medical Center. Minnesota's medical provider community is large and diverse and our emphasis on prevention has produced health insurance rates 18 - 23 percent below the national average.
But these advantages are meaningless to the nearly seven percent of Minnesotans who have no medical coverage of any kind. And' with medical costs increasing between two and three times the rate of inflation each year, that seven percent figure is not likely to go down. Rising costs are pressuring Minnesota business at every level, and placing a growing burden on more than 17,000 self-employed farmers who lack legal authority to deduct more than a small percentage of their health insurance premiums.
I believe there is a national consensus in support of health care reform, and the time to begin that reform is now. Several months ago I prepared and legislative leaders introduced a plan called "HEART', which will phase in reforms designed to bring health care coverage within the financial reach of every Minnesota family. Other legislators, health providers and several business groups have offered similar, innovative proposals. The time has come for us to forget about pride of authorship, recognize that we are all working toward the same goal, and begin turning these proposals into reality.
The "health care crisis" is really two issues - assuring health care access, and controlling health care costs. I want the legislature to adopt legislation addressing both issues in the upcoming legislative session. At a minimum, that bill should:
· Provide every Minnesota child with access to affordable health care by removing financial barriers to health care coverage for Minnesota's 70,000 uninsured children.
· Give Minnesota farmers and other self-employed workers a fair shake by reforming the Tax Code to permit them to deduct 100% of their health insurance costs.
· Grant relief to small businesses by authorizing a basic health coverage package free from the multiple state mandates that are driving insurance costs out of the reach of so many independent businesses.
· Provide mechanisms to increase access to basic health care services in rural Minnesota.
· Include meaningful and realistic cost containment provisions.
Finally, it is essential that the bill have a financing mechanism that will cover its costs without requiring us to cut back other programs like education or human services to pay for the health care plan.
The HEART proposal achieves every one of these objectives.
We all recognize that Minnesota lacks the financial resources to resolve the entire health care access issue in a single year. But that is not a reason to delay beginning the process of finding a solution.
We are already recognized as the national leader in the quality of our health care system. There is no reason why we cannot adopt a plan in this legislative session that will make us the national leader in assuring access to that system.
We can also make meaningful improvement in our quality of life by adopting thoughtful reforms in our violence prevention, correction and crime victims assistance programs.
Last year, the incidence of violent crime, hate crimes and domestic abuse in Minnesota increased substantially. That is out of character with our society, and we need to reverse this trend before the public safety in the Twin Cities deteriorates as it has in other growing metropolitan areas.

Yesterday a group of legislative leaders joined me in announcing a comprehensive public safety package. Included in that package of more than sixty recommendations are:
· Greater protection for domestic assault victims.
· Truth in sentencing guidelines and strengthened penalties for DWI and crimes against people.
· Streamlined record-keeping systems to assist police in identifying and arresting suspects more quickly.
· Making sure that the sentence in any property related crime must include restitution of the losses of the victim.
A society that lives in fear has no quality of life. The recommendations in this package can stem the trend toward violent crime before it changes our society. Differences among legislators on these issues are not unresolvable, and I expect the legislature to pass a public safety improvement package before it adjourns this spring.
But we cannot lose sight of the fact that the responsibility for a violence free Minnesota goes beyond the legislature. While legislators do their part, you and I must do ours. The root causes of violence in our society begin in the home, on the playgrounds and on neighborhood streets. We each contribute to the tolerance of violence in subtle ways. The most important thing we can do to break the cycle of violence is to change our own attitudes. That means rejecting actions as subtle as a cruel word spoken in the home, or as vicious as the hate mail being directed toward minority groups in the Minneapolis community. There is no place for either in our society, and we need to stand together and say it.
The effort to make Minnesota violence free cannot be limited to a single week. It is a lifetime effort, with success and failure resting in your hands and mine. In crime as in so many other areas, the state of this state in future years is ours to
shape - and I think we are equal to the challenge.
While we work together to achieve these long-term reforms, there are immediate needs in Minnesota that must be addressed.
The effects of the national recession are being felt in every comer of this state. By national standards, our problem is not severe; our unemployment rate is 30 percent below the national average. But by Minnesota standards the human impact of these numbers is not acceptable.
No one should be naive enough to believe that a state the size of Minnesota can single-handedly affect the course of the national economy. But we do have a moral obligation to do everything within our power to lessen the impact of recession on our people. Through some simple common sense actions, we can provide jobs for thousands of Minnesotans right now, when they are needed most. And taking those actions should be the legislature's first priority when it returns on February 18.
There are more than $155 million dollars in labor intensive capital construction projects planned in Minnesota over the next two years. The need for those projects is not in dispute; many are already authorized. What we need to do is accelerate the construction schedule for these projects so they can begin now, when we need the jobs, rather than next year or the year after.
Although Minnesota's bonding authority is limited to three percent of revenues, we can also issue approximately $75 million dollars in capital construction bonds for badly needed schools and public infrastructure projects without exceeding the 3 percent limit.
These actions, taken together, would immediately create between 6,000 and 8,000 jobs. And because they involve accelerating projects rather than new spending programs, they will not worsen the budget shortfall, and will not require us to cut back other programs.

I have already issued an Executive Order authorizing the acceleration of $55 million dollars in labor intensive construction contracts. Those contracts will put approximately 2,000 Minnesota families to work. But I cannot implement the rest of the program without legislative approval.
This jobs bill is a fiscally sound way to create jobs for thousands of Minnesota families. It will pump tens of millions of dollars into our economy when our economy needs it most. I have made no secret of the fact that I am extremely disappointed that the legislature did not find time to act on this program during its January session. Families are hurting, and they need help now.
It's time for us to put politics and past disputes behind at least on this issue. When the legislature returns next week, let's work together to get this program adopted. We can all share the credit, as Minnesota's workers and their families share its benefits.
Unfortunately, while we pursue these opportunities we also have to face the difficult task of putting our own financial house in order.
Just as the recession has affected Minnesota workers, it. has affected the state itself. Income tax revenues are running more than $400 million dollars below projected levels, giving us a recession induced budget shortfall of approximately $343 million dollars. And frankly, the shortfall could increase when the February 28 forecast is released. We have no choice but to close that shortfall.
Why? The simple answer is that Minnesota law does not permit the state to carry a shortfall into the next biennium. But even if we had that authority, we would have to close the shortfall because of the damage it would do to every one of us if we resorted to long term borrowing.
The borrowing necessary to close this shortfall would cost Minnesota taxpayers between $100 and $120 million dollars in interest between now and the end of the next biennium. That represents over $100 million tax dollars that do not go to housing, do not go to education, and do not go to health care. They would instead be consumed in interest payments to whoever is willing to loan several hundred million dollars. to the state. That would be an indefensible use of taxpayer money.
It is also essential to remember that borrowing would lower Minnesota's bond rating - driving up the cost of schools, hospitals, highways and other capital improvements built with state bonds.
Failure to close the shortfall would make it more costly for Minnesota to maintain its social investments and its quality of life. It would also be the best way to ensure that our children will not have access to the same level of economic opportunity that we have enjoyed.
Unfortunately, there is no painless way to put the budget back in balance. There are only two ways to close the shortfall - spending reductions, or higher taxes. And I will do everything in my power to avoid a general tax increase.
I am going to have to propose remedies I do not want to propose, and the legislature will adopt spending cuts that. it doesn't want to vote on. But as Harriet Bishop discovered a century and a half ago, building the future requires sacrifices, difficult decisions and the courage to make the right choices. And I am well aware that you did not elect any public official to make only the easy decisions. I will do everything I can to minimize the pain, but there will be pain. We will cut back not because we want to but because we have to. And I sincerely hope we can achieve that solution through a bipartisan agreement.
Recession response, health care reform, workers' compensation reform, educational improvement and a better crime prevention program. These are Minnesota's priorities, and they are all achievable in the next legislative session. We can also elect not to act, if that's our choice. The state of the state, and the quality of life in our society, will be whatever we chose to make them. But I have no doubt that we are equal to the challenge of providing our children an even better future and an even stronger state than the one we inherited.Madam Speaker, fellow constitutional officers, former governors, members of the Supreme Court, and its newest member, Alan Page; appellate court justices under the new leadership of Paul Anderson; members of the Minnesota Legislature and especially our 50 new legislators - I want to say thank you for your commitment to serve.

I believe 1993 will be a year when we will be proud to say that we are Minnesotans. My optimism is based on the record that we have built together over the past two years:

· Today we have a health care system in Minnesota that is accessible and affordable to all hard-working families.

· We value our beautiful Minnesota environment so much that we protect it through the most comprehensive wetlands laws in the nation. It was our record in the area of water quality that motivated the National Audubon Society to honor our administration with an award for excellence in the environment - the only American elected official to receive this award in the last five years.

· We learned, and some may say we learned the hard way, that it is too expensive for companies to exist, let alone expand in Minnesota... so we reduced rates for worker's compensation and reduced the rates for commercial industrial property taxes.

· We said we're fed up and we're not going to take it anymore when it comes to crime. We now have stiffer penalties for a variety of crimes, particularly rape. We have put more dollars into violence prevention. And now we are seeking new laws against stalkers.

· And when it comes down to making those tough choices during the tightest financial times I've seen as an elected official, we have protected the funding for our children's education. We know what matters.

And we will close the gap between anticipated revenues and expenditures without a tax increase.
This is what happens when we choose to work together.
This legislature has earned a reputation for being visionary. When I talk to other governors and hear their stories I am reminded of how fortunate I am to work with a body that time and again shows that it knows how to get things done for the people of Minnesota.
We have proven that we can rise above the gridlock. And we will do it again. We must fmd the direct route to change and improvement in order to address the challenges that lie ahead.
Since becoming governor in 1991, I have spent a great deal of time listening to Minnesotans describe their concerns, their challenges, and most importantly, what their dreams are for the future. I listened as they talked and I heard Minnesotans say they want three things:
· First, people are concerned about getting and keeping good jobs. Those who have lost their jobs are suffering. Those who have had to settle for low-paying jobs are hurting. And those who have good jobs are worried about losing them. All of us can identify with what a job means to a family. That is why last month I proposed a plan that will help employers, especially small businesses, create more jobs for Minnesotans, the people who I believe are the most productive workers in America.
· Second, Minnesotans told me that they want to protect and enhance our very special quality of life - from our pristine natural resources to our exciting diversity of cultural attractions.
· And finally, a theme that resonated in every town from Rochester to Roseau as we traveled around the state for Minnesota Milestones: We want to say to every child, 'You can be anything you want to be.' We want to see every child come to school ready to learn, we want families to provide a stable environment for their children, we want all our children to be healthy and we want every young person to gain the skills needed to Compete in a global economy.


Tonight I want to focus this State of the State speech on the subject I hold closest to my heart - the needs of our children.
Two years ago, I appointed a commission to take a hard look at how we serve our children and their families. Under the leadership of Ron James and my wife Susan, the Action for Children Commission has turned out to be an excellent example of the results that can be accomplished through a partnership among businesses, communities, advocates for children and government.
In the course of its work, the commission tried to answer two simple questions: First, how much money are we, as a state, spending each year on children? Second, what kinds of results are we getting?
The commission identified at least 250 children's programs, administered through 33 different state agencies, boards and commissions, costing Minnesota taxpayers $4.5 billion dollars a year.
Over the years, with the very best of intentions, we have created a tangled, bureaucratic web of children's programs. I would guess that not one of us in this chamber can name all of them. We have created too many individual government specialty shops. And we invite our customers to wait in line to see if they might be able to squeeze into the narrow product we are selling. If they cannot, they trudge on to the next shop.
Families and children who need help are frustrated by the complexity of the system and often do not get the kind of help they need. They end up working with dozens of case workers, counselors and eligibility specialists who are connected back to a confusing maze of inflexible programs. Our children are being divided into pieces by a system that is largely government centered and difficult to use.
And what are the results? Too many of our children are failing. Maybe they aren't your children or mine, but in every school there are children who are being left behind. And when these young people act out, they affect the way all our children learn. Eventually, we all pay for failed outcomes.


Every child deserves our very best. Nowhere is there more hope and potential than in the curious face of a two-year old, and nowhere is there more tragedy than in the angry face of a 13 year-old who cannot adequately read, nor more disappointment than in the face of a 17-year-old who has just been told he has no marketable job skills.
We need to give our young people more options.
Gwen Marshall from Minneapolis is just one example. Gwen graduated years ago with average grades from North High School. She was married, had a daughter, and was later divorced. As a single parent, she worked full-time during the day and sometimes held evening jobs in retail sales. Eventually the draining routine, the day care payments and being away from her young daughter got to be too much, so she quit her jobs and went on AFDC.
To her credit, Gwen enrolled in a skilled trades program at St. Paul Technical College last year, 17 years after she graduated from high school. She will complete the program this summer and someday wants to teach at a high school or a technical college. I have met Gwen, and I am confident she will attain any goal to which she aspires. She is with us this evening. Gwen Marshall in the center balcony.
But we have not been fair to the Gwen Marshalls of Minnesota, and there are many of them. Today I would like to promise you Gwen that we can and we will give your daughter more career options.
In my own life, education has meant everything. If it were not for the unique opportunities that I had, and the sturdy encouragement I received from my parents, I know this: I would not be here tonight, and I suspect the same is true for most of you.
Gwen's story illustrates that the system that has served most of us and our parents so well for so long is no longer adequate. In Minnesota, we can arid must do better.
The high-performance employers of today demand high skills from every employee at every level. Employers allover the state are telling me they cannot find the kinds of qualified workers they need. They are frustrated by the widening skills gap.


· The results of a recent Trade and Economic Development survey tell us that 70 percent of Minnesota companies report difficulty in recruiting skilled and technical workers.
· In a brand new survey of 351 Minnesota businesses conducted by the Minnesota Business Partnership, 52 percent of Twin Cities employers believe today's job applicants lack adequate basic skills in reading, writing and math.
Ninety percent said they would like to see Minnesota high school graduates be
certified as meeting minimum standards.
· Another large Minnesota employer reports that 75 percent of the Minnesota youth applying for jobs with their company cannot pass the company's basic employment exam.
· A manager of one of Minnesota's most prestigious technology companies told us his company finds better qualified high school graduates in Guadalajara, Mexico, than in Minnesota. That bothers me.
We do not have a job shortage in Minnesota - we have a skills shortage. And I fear that this skills shortage will eventually drive high-skills jobs out of the state.
This is not the fault of our children. It is not the fault of our teachers or schools or communities. The blame largely rests with a fragmented system that sends out mixed messages to our children; a system that has not yet recognized that our children will compete in a world economy.
Our young people deserve a bigger, better package of education and training possibilities. Students need linkages to the rapidly changing, increasingly technological world.
In Minnesota, we have begun to address some of these problems. We have created, for the first time, a Children's Cabinet consisting of all the state government department heads whose agencies provide services to children and families. This executive level cabinet has taken an inventory of all children's programs in the state and formulated Minnesota's first integrated children's budget.


I can assure you that this budget, which reflects the needs of Minnesota's children, will be
my number one priority this session. We will protect our overall spending on children from budget cuts.
In other areas too, Minnesota's leadership on behalf of children is being recognized on the national level.
· We are a leading candidate to receive a multi-million dollar grant from a major national foundation to completely reinvent the way we serve families and children.
· A team of Minnesota educators will receive up to $14 million from a national fund to design new kinds of schools that will serve as community learning centers for people of all ages.
· We are distinctive among all states in our commitment to Head Start. Minnesota is one of only a handful of states that invest in Head Start beyond what the federal government gives us. And we increased our commitment by 30 percent last year.
But we need to do more.
TONIGHT I AM PROPOSING THE NEXT LOGICAL STEP - TO BRING TOGETHER, FOR THE FIRST TIME, PROGRAMS THAT ADDRESS THE NEEDS OF CHILDREN AND THEIR FAMILIES.
What I am proposing tonight is nothing less than an overhaul of our system from top to bottom - an agenda for change, to keep Minnesota in a national leadership position on children and families, and to prepare our young people for the work force of the 21st Century.
Our administration is committed to putting our customers first, and in Minnesota, children are our number one customer. It is time we reorganize around the needs of today's child, to start with the child, and carefully build out from there a complement of services at the local level that makes sense and leads to successful, confident kids.


I recognize these proposals are significant, and therefore will not pass without a great deal of controversy and spirited debate. But Representative Willard Munger told me two years ago, and I quote, "If something isn't controversial, it's probably no damn good anyway." I tend to agree with you, Willard.
WHAT WE ARE PROPOSING IS TO CREATE A NEW DEPARTMENT - THE MINNESOTA DEPARTMENT OF CHILDREN AND EDUCATION SERVICES.
Let me repeat that. We are proposing to create a new department - the Minnesota Department of Children and Education Services - to address the needs of the total child, from
infancy through the teenage years. Creating a new department will mean dramatically
changing, and in some cases, abolishing, existing agencies. But we cannot let long-standing battles over turf and reverence for institutions stop us from taking meaningful steps for children and their families.
What will this mean to children and families who need help? It will mean that for the first time, there will be a single agency responsible for cutting through the bureaucratic tape on behalf of children. It will mean that a single agency head can be held accountable for producing better results. It will mean that· families can be more assured of finding and getting comprehensive help in one convenient location. And it will mean that every child will have a better shot at success.
Changes are already taking place in Minnesota that reflect this new approach of putting children, not systems, first. This new department will support those community-based efforts. We have learned that some of the most effective programs, such as Head Start, work best because they involve families in all aspects of the program and they rely on local community involvement.
We will use this philosophy throughout the Department of Children and Education Services as we bring in programs in addition to Head Start such as Early Childhood Family Education, Early Childhood Screening, Learning Readiness, Way to Grow, Even Start, the Children's Trust Fund and a host of others that focus on those critical years in a child's life from birth to kindergarten enrollment.
By reinventing the way we serve these young children, we will begin to make some sense out of a fragmented, disjointed system.


In addition to reorganizing at the state level, we will offer incentives to local officials, Community Action agencies, schools, parents and non-profits to forge a new partnership around the needs of children and families. Our budget proposal, which will be unveiled in 12 days, will include $10 million dollars in new grants to be awarded to communities who develop collaborative ways to help children and responsible families succeed, and who make a commitment to measuring results for children.
Because education is such an important part of our children's lives, we invite educators to join in a dynamic partnership with the whole array of other children's services. To do this, we will propose that the education services currently provided by the Department of Education be incorporated into the new Department of Children and Education Services.
This new department will carry forward the commitment we have made to make our
education system one that is driven by results.
We have talked about standards in education long enough. It is time to take action. To set
standards. To set them high, and to measure the results.
Having serious, measurable standards will assure us that no child will slide through high school without basic skills. These new benchmarks ultimately will bring a more individualized approach to teaching and learning, because once these standards are in place, the state is going to step back and simply send the money and resources educators need to help students achieve this level of competency.
No more micro-management. No more state regulations about how many hours of French or geography a child needs. We will stop piling on our teachers every social goal that should be delivered by families, churches and other institutions.
We are going to let local schools do their jobs. We will free teachers up to teach. Our focus at the state level will only be on outcomes.
We will ask the Department of Children and Education Services to determine and assess educational standards so that by about the 10th grade, our students will have mastered a rigorous set of academic skills. As students pass through this gateway of achievement, we can be assured that every one of them has the basic skills needed to proceed on to the next level.


In addition to assuring that no child is left behind in their early years, we must begin to address the job training needs of our young adults. Which brings me to the next major part of our proposal this evening, and it has to do with 'how we prepare our young people for the high-skill, high-wage jobs of tomorrow.
I PROPOSE THAT MINNESOTA MOVE AGGRESSIVELY TO CREATE OUR OWN SYSTEM OF YOUTH APPRENTICESHIPS - THAT WE FORGE A NEW PARTNERSHIP WITH BUSINESS, EDUCATION, LABOR AND GOVERNMENT THAT WILL WIDEN THE OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE TO OUR YOUNG PEOPLE.
I am proposing tonight that we commit to giving our young people more meaningful options while they are in high school - options that will compel them to stay in school, work hard, gain hands-on training in a high-skill occupation and, at the end of four years, secure a well-paying job.
To the 20 percent of Minnesotans who complete a four-year degree, our education system may appear to be working just fine. But 80 percent of Minnesotans never complete such a degree. We need a new focus on the 16- to 20-year-olds who are at risk of leaving the education system without the skills needed to enter a secure high-wage career.
We need to place a special emphasis on reaching out to our at-risk youth - children of color, children in poverty, children who learn best in a hands-on environment, children who now are falling through the cracks of our system into a future of despair.
With a youth apprenticeship program in place, students will have the option of pursuing college preparation courses or a combination of academic classes and hands-on job training during their last two years of high school.
Will this kind of learning program trap our kids into making narrow, one-way choices? Absolutely not. Will it give all teenagers and young adults more options? You bet.
Work-based learning will put a solid floor under a young person's career. Many will take this experience and go on to a college or university later. That is how it works in Europe. For example, one third of all practicing engineers in Germany went through apprenticeship programs first, and then went on to the university for further education.


This youth apprenticeship program will also be coordinated by the new Department of Children and Education Services.
In my budget message later this month I will also propose establishing Education and Training Accounts for every young Minnesotan. For those students whose families are less able to save for training and education, we will contribute to their accounts. We will challenge philanthropies, employers and parents to save through these accounts so that no young person will stand at the threshold of training opportunities without the resources to participate.
This new department will serve as a school-to-work bridge for students; linking students with training and linking trained students with good jobs.
We recognize that industry, in partnership with labor and educators, is the key to this youth apprenticeship program. For employers who participate, this means finding new resources for training and finding the money in today's tough economic climate to pay the wages that students will earn during training.
But business will ultimately see that, long term, this is an investment that brings powerful returns.
Honeywell has already stepped forward with an offer to open up 80 apprenticeship spots within their Minnesota facilities. Jim Renier, CEO of Honeywell is with us tonight, and on behalf of all Minnesotans I want to say thank you Jim, for your leadership.
Minnesota employers have established a number of meaningful partnerships with local high schools, technical schools and colleges. But tonight I am calling upon them to do much more.
Now we must also recognize that government alone will never be good at rearing children. Every sector of the community must playa role.
Parents, especially, must take an active role. There is only one place where children can learn that they are lovable, capable human beings, and that is at home. It is up to parents to teach their children the importance of responsibility and the rewards of hard work.


Our young people must come to grips with the fact that learning demands their rigorous participation. It does not occur through osmosis, it is not a spectator sport and it is not free. Minnesota taxpayers are paying more than $6,000 per year to educate each student and we expect hard work in return. I want to make sure that students are working hard on their .education.
It was shocking to me to learn that Minnesota leads the nation in the number of youth employed in the work force, with 69 percent of Minnesota teenagers working an average of 24 hours a week. Teachers tell me that these students come to school tired and unprepared. The 1992 Minnesota Student Survey confirms that grades drop off dramatically for those students who work 20 or more hours per week. This tells us that too many young people today are being held back by peer pressure to earn money and by a culture tied to cars, clothes and CDs.
We must introduce a new seriousness into the business of learning and communicate that seriousness to our kids. We will propose legislation this month to limit youth who have not yet completed high school from working more than 20 hours per week during the school year.
IN SUMMARY, TONIGHT I HAVB OUTLINED A PROPOSAL THAT WILL BRING TOGETHER THREE DYNAMIC SUPPORT SYSTEMS INTO ONE COHESIVE DEPARTMENT FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH.
· First we will bring together all those critical programs for our youngest children before they enter kindergarten.
· To this we will add educational programming for elementary and secondary students with an emphasis on setting rigorous academic standards for all students.
· And then we will add the third piece, and what is now the missing link, career preparation in the form of youth apprenticeship training for our young adults.
This new department will support a seamless, community-based approach to serving young people in Minnesota.

It is an ambitious agenda, and I look forward to discussing these proposals and others with you. But there is a sense of urgency. Our work force is in stiff competition with workers in other countries. Real wages in America have declined in the past 20 years. I know that President-elect Bill Clinton understands these issues very well, because I have worked with him and the governors of other states to put these issues on the national agenda. I say tonight to President-elect Clinton: Minnesota is ready to work with you to lead the nation in making America's work force the best in the world. What we're talking about tonight is a new team effort, and every player must pitch in and work hard in order to win - government, business, parents, children, all of us. If we start today and work together, our kids will come out on top. Thank you very much.Thank you Mayor Hazama. Speaker-Designate Anderson, fellow constitutional officers, Governor Harold Stassen, Governor Elmer Anderson, members of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeals, members of the Minnesota Legislature and friends.
Nearly four years ago, I called Joanell Dyrstad and asked her to be my running mate as lieutenant governor. I feel extremely fortunate, and Minnesotans are fortunate, that she chose to say yes that day. She has served our state and its people with a great deal of intelligence, tenacity and concern for the real issues that affect people., It was with great regret that I accepted her decision to run for the U.S. Senate, but I respect that decision and wish her all the very best.
Lieutenant Governor Dyrstad, thank you ever so much.
Thank you all for being here with me in Rochester, the best place to live in the entire country according to Money Magazine, and probably according to many of you here today. We came here because the Rochester area represents so much of what is good and so much of what is changing in our state.
Rochester is home to a vital computer industry that has and will continue to thrive amid turbulence; and it is also home to a world-renowned health care giant, the Mayo Clinic, which exemplifies Minnesota's reputation for excellence.
This is an important day for all of Minnesota as we reflect on where we are, and where it is that we want to be as we approach the 21st century.

As I stand here today, I can say, with more confidence than I have had since the 1970s, that Minnesota is back on track. And we now have an unparalleled opportunity to forge ahead... into a future that is certain to be brighter for ourselves and for our children.
Two months ago, I became a grandfather for the very first time. I honestly did not expect it to be quite such a moving experience. Having a new little granddaughter only reaffirmed what I have known for years - that our job is to do what is right for the longterm. and build a better Minnesota to leave to our children:
· We want it to be a Minnesota in which violent crime is no longer an ever-present threat, where people know and care about one another and our streets and schools are safe.
· We want it to be a place where Minnesotans can find secure and promising jobs.
· And we want it to be a Minnesota in which your kids and my kids and their kids - our grandchildren - will know that if they are responsible, caring, honest and hard working - they will achieve their dreams.
Three years ago, when I delivered my first State of the State message, Minnesota was headed in the wrong direction.
Our administration inherited an immediate 200 million-dollar budget shortfall, and faced a 1.8 billion-dollar projected gap between spending and revenue. Today, three years later, we are looking at a projected surplus of 430 million dollars.
We chose the tough road, but it was the right road.
First, we put the brakes on runaway spending. During the 1980s, the growth in state government exceeded the growth in people's paychecks by 15 percent. Since then, we have frozen the number of state employees, held the growth of government to the growth in personal income, implemented a wage freeze, and cut welfare for able-bodied adults.


None of these things were easy. But if we had not made the tough choices when we did - we would have had. to raise taxes. And if we had chosen to solve the problem we inherited with income taxes, Minnesotans would have seen a permanent income tax increase of 23 percent - 340 dollars for every family of four with an income of $40,000. That is what we prevented. 
In the process, we' quickly became the target of nearly every entrenched and powerful spending system in Minnesota. And as we were being attacked by all the forces that resists change - it was then that I knew we were doing something right.
Today, Minnesota is back on track and charging ahead with vigor. We can all take pride in the fact that Financial World magazine just ranked Minnesota the third best managed state in America and we have regained our AAA credit rating.
We have set priorities: putting job creation, improving the lives of children and fighting crime at the top of our list.
In the past three years, we have taken dramatic steps that will enhance Minnesota's quality of life for years to come.
· Together with the Minnesota Legislature, we implemented sweeping health care reform to bring down the cost of health care for all Minnesotans without penalizing employers, taking away competition, or jeopardizing the outstanding quality of our health care in this state. Minnesota is now looked upon as a national model for health care reform.
· We have launched environmental policies that are nationally recognized, including the most comprehensive wetlands protection legislation in the country, and a far-reaching effort to clean up the Minnesota River.
· In the devastating floods of 1993 we all came together to help those affected. As chairman of the Midwestern Governors' Association, it was my privilege to lead a delegation of governors to Washington to tell congress about the very real, long-term impact of the floods on our people. As a result of that effort, we came home with 446 million dollars, or twice as much aid as Washington had intended to give us.

· I am proud of our work on behalf of Minnesota's children. Despite the state's severe financial crisis, we have directed substantially more resources to children each year, and we are spending those dollars much more effectively on programs that work .... on early learning, education, children's health, youth apprenticeship, parent education, child abuse prevention, child support enforcement and nutrition programs.
As I travel the state, visiting with Minnesota parentS and their children I realize how much more is left to be done.
· Today Minnesota has an nationally recognized education system that allows for school choice and charter schools, and we have talented, innovative educators who help our students to achieve world class test scores. Our post-secondary institutions now have a clear sense of purpose and are poised to meet the work force needs of the 21st century.
· We have kept our promises to those who create jobs by curbing the costs of doing business here, with a specific focus on reforming workers' compensation and reducing commercial and industrial property tax rates.
We helped Northwest Airlines through a critical time - maintaining the Twin Cities as one of the few major international transportation gateways in the country and preserving 17,000 direct jobs, plus another 60,000 that depend on the airline for survival.
Minnesota is clearly back on track. But one thing stands squarely in the way of our progress, and that is violent crime.
Unlike other crises we have faced, such as floods and bitter cold snaps, violence pulls us apart - not together -- and tugs at the core values that have made this state great. Violence has caused us to change our lifestyles, trust other people less, and to be afraid always for ourselves and our loved ones.


In 1992 and 1993 we took bold measures to stop violence in its tracks by passing the toughest and most comprehensive crime bill in Minnesota's history. We lengthened, and in many cases quadrupled, prison sentences for a long list of violent crimes involving murder, rape, possession of guns in schools, and drive-by shootings. We passed an antistalking law, giving women and other victims of stalking the means to put their assailants in jail.
We instituted a new truth-in-sentencing policy meaning that all convicted criminals serve all of their time. Thirty years means three decades under lock and key.
Many of us can fondly recall our own childhoods in a simpler time, when teachers cited their biggest discipline problems as students running in the halls and chewing gum in class, when neighbors relied on one another and kept an eye out for each other's children. And when murders were something that happened in faraway places, not to kids who live down the street.
How many of our veterans, who risked and lost lives on foreign soil, would have ever believed that the biggest threat to our safety would someday come from within our own communities? How many would have believed then that in 1994, a substantial percentage of Minnesotans would be afraid to walk at night in their own neighborhoods?
We cannot go back, but we can pull together. We can adopt realistic short- and longterm changes now that will restore our trust and remove dangerous predators from the streets.
A Minneapolis police officer recently told me he thought it was time we do more than manage crime. It's time we start fighting it.
H we are serious about fighting crime, we are going to have to make some changes:
· First, we must stop the six percent of the people who are committing 70 percent of the crimes. That means targeting our resources to the most dangerous -- the people we are afraid of.

· I have asked the legislature for a "three-time loser" law that guarantees a 15-year mandatory minimum sentence for those convicted of a third violent crime. With this law in place, it's three times, and you're off the streets and in prison for at least 15 years.
· We must aggressively deal with the 60 percent rise in juvenile crime since 1988.
· We must send a clear message that in Minnesota, violent criminals, young and old, will be held accountable.
· We must not wipe clean the records of serious juvenile offenders when they reach 18. And we must make absolutely certain that regardless of their age, cold calculated criminals are dealt with aggressively - as adults -- and with as much sympathy and compassion as they show their own victims.
Sixteen year-old Jason Williams is just one example. He had come into contact with at least 10 police departments before he broke into a Brooklyn Park home just over a year ago. He spent the entire day there, eating, drinking and watching television until the owner arrived home with her two small children.
Williams murdered her, then killed one of the children and left the other for dead.
He then took her car, her cash and her wedding ring and picked up his friends for an exciting night out on the town.
The pain of this nightmare will always remain. We cannot change that - only offer our support and our prayers. But we can change a juvenile justice system that failed to stop Jason Williams earlier - that failed to show him swift, sure consequences when he was arrested for theft and assault earlier.
What scares us more than the crimes sometimes are the attitudes of these young predators is the total lack of remorse. Existing laws are not effective in dealing with this tidal wave of brutal, violent youth.
6

I intend to create structured summer camps and reinforce community programs for those young people who are teetering on the edge. Youth workers tell me they can predict with a great deal of accuracy which children are most likely to fall into a life of crime. We must target our efforts, reach out, and catch these kids before they fall into life of street crime.
I want to dismantle ridiculous data privacy laws that prevent teachers, police and social workers from sharing basic information about dangerous young people. Today a police officer is required to tell school officials if a minor has been caught drinking beer, but that same officer is forbidden to let the school know if a kid is accused of murder.
We must give our teachers the assistance they need to maintain order in the classroom. They need the authority to use reasonable force to control violent young renegades who systematically shatter the learning process for all students. It is crazy that we have let some kids run the show for so long.
We can do all these things - make all these changes - in 1994, and they will have a tremendous impact. But prisons, prosecutors and punishment cannot stop the pipeline of children who are growing up angry, afraid and increasingly violent right now.
Violence is rooted in a fundamental breakdoWn of the family. Sure, there are other factors that perpetuate violence such as drugs, unemployment, alcohol and poverty. And certainly the media and the entertainment industry perpetuate violence with their glorification of murder and criminal behavior.
But thousands of strong families have overcome these obstacles and demonstrated that a strong and caring home life can give children the solid foundation they need, not just to endure all the risk factors, but to excel, to thrive and to succeed.
We cannot let Minnesota become a state of victims - always blaming government or teachers or social workers or police or employers for what happens to us. We can take charge of our destiny; and we are responsible for our actions.
We cannot be afraid to talk anew about values. Values are not something that died with our pioneering ancestors. Most of us believe very deeply in things like individual responsibility, mutual respect, hard work, trust and honesty. We believe in the inherent strength of families and we want close-knit communities.


We must take these values with us. They must be part of our future.
Government can reflect these values with a reconstructed welfare system. Last week I proposed a comprehensive reform plan that gives people who apply for welfare whether they have lived in Minnesota 20 years or two days - a job, not a check.
I have asked the legislature to reverse policies that now make Minnesota a magnet for people who choose not to work. Let's face the facts: 42 percent of those on welfare in Hennepin County moved here within the past year; and 600 convicted criminals in our state prisons lived in Minnesota less than two years before being sentenced. Minnesota taxpayers are tired of importing trouble and dependency from other states. It's time to close the gates.
We want to remove the barriers to working and the excuses for not working. We must get rid of all the backward incentives that now reward dependency, reward unemployment, reward having children out-of-wedlock and reward families who self-destruct.
The new system is designed to help people stand proudly on their own two feet with a broad range of support including health care, transportation and child care. But after two years, if you refuse to participate, then we refuse to prop you up anymore.
Government can support strong family values by holding both parents responsible for their kids:
· We must bluntly explain the realities of parenting to all our high school youth so they fully understand that having a child is a life-long emotional and financial commitment.
· We must continue to tighten-up child support enforcement to hold both parents responsible for the well-being of their children.
· We must require teenage moms who apply for welfare to live with their parents, and either work or go to school.
· And we must require parents to accompany their kids in court.


These are some of the things that government can do to reflect the values of responsibility and strong families in Minnesota.
still, all the government policies in the world cannot save us if we abandon values of individual responsibility.
Government cannot raise children.
Being a good parent today is one of the toughest jobs there is. To all Minnesota parents, including the divorced moms and dads, who manage to go to the parent-teacher conferences, coach the soccer teams arid take their kids camping - to those of you who are there for your kids, despite your own struggles, thank you. Your kids need you desperately, and Minnesota does too.
Strong families are the real key to a more cohesive, less violent future.
But there must be much more to our vision than stopping crime. Violence is a barrier, and as we overcome that formidable barrier we must commit ourselves to a plan that gives all of us reason to believe in tomorrow.
That vision must be one of opportunity - and jobs.
Everything we have come to cherish hinges upon our ability to grow and keep jobs in Minnesota - our schools, our health care, our state parks, our roads and the integrity and safety of our communities. A decent job can give a family independence, stability and a reason to dream about the future.
That is why jobs have been, and continue to be, the long-term focus of this administration.
When I talk about jobs, I am talking about good jobs -- jobs that require knowledge and skill - jobs that are rewarding, that pay well and offer opportunities for promotion. I am talking about entrepreneurs and small businesses, because they offer the greatest potential for more and better jobs in Minnesota.
We care about jobs, we must care deeply about education, because employers today need skilled, able and competent workers.


For the first time in decades, we are setting our academic sights higher in Minnesota with the development of new graduation standards. These standards are being drafted over the next several months. I want them to be clear, objective and easy to measure. I want them to reflect basic academic skills such as math, science, communications, and geography - abilities that our children need to compete in the world economy.
If we care about jobs, we must understand the urgency of the changes we need to make to bring down the cost of doing business here.
Minnesota workers are known for their hard work and high skills. So why is it that so many are constantly worried about holding on to their jobs? The answer is simple: it costs more to do business here.
In 1992 a total of 10 manufacturers - collectively employing nearly 900 people -- moved out of Minnesota: to South Dakota, Wisconsin, Nebraska, North Dakota, Kansas and Missouri. Eight of these 10 firms cited high workers compensation costs or burdensome taxes as the most significant factor in their overall decision to move.
We have made changes since then, but they are not nearly enough. We must bring down workers compensation costs this year. We will put a proposal before the legislature that we know will result in lower costs, higher efficiency and has proven to work in Wisconsin. This proposal.has had the support of both labor and management in that state for years.
I will ask each and every legislator to do that which they know is right, vote for jobs and vote "yes" on this proven reform plan.
If we care about jobs, we must take a long-term pledge not to raise taxes - not now and not for years to come. Government can and must live within its means.
In fact, this year I want to begin to phase out a burdensome sales tax on replacement capital equipment that penalizes manufacturers from expanding and creating new jobs in Minnesota. Computers and equipment don't pay taxes, people do. And this tax is hurting a lot of hard-working people.


These are critical steps to bringing jobs to Minnesota. But if we want to make more of these kinds of changes - changes that are good for people and good for jobs -- changes that lead to less government and more opportunity for people to succeed - then we need term limits in Minnesota.
When a legislator sits in the house or the senate for decades at a time, he or she can loose touch with the broad based concerns of people. Over time, the entrenched lawmaker accumulates far more power and influence than his newer colleagues and grows dependent upon powerful spending lobbies and special interest groups.
I am for term limits. But the legislature has repeatedly rejected my attempts to let Minnesotans vote on this issue. Members of the legislature, we must let the people decide, and decide in 1994.
· Because we care about jobs, we have begun to make government less of a barrier, and sometimes even a partner, in job growth.
· We can help bring technology and assistance to companies to help them increase productivity.
· We are creating one-stop shopping to help businesses find their way more quickly through the maze of government regulations.
· And we continue to promote Minnesota products and services around the globe.
Today Minnesota has a lot to say to the world.
When I visit with intemational leaders I tell them that Minnesota is back on track and open for business. 130,000 new Minnesota jobs have been created since 1991. We now rank ninth in the nation in job growth.
We have so much on which to build. Minnesota has a massive financial service industry, a vital bio-technology corridor, a growing list of environmental service companies, a dynamic printing industry, a booming medical alley, a renewed computer sector, a solid agri-business industry and a critical manufacturing base that is just starting to improve.
11

There is a new economic confidence in Minnesota that we have not seen in decades.
Banner Engineering is just one example -- a Plymouth company that just announced it will open a new plant in Fergus Falls, employing 150 people. Four years ago, when faced with the decision of where to locate a new plant, President and founder Bob Fayfield chose South Dakota.
This year, citing a turn-around in Minnesota's business climate, and a new pro-jobs attitude in state government he selected rural Minnesota. Bob is here today and I thank him for his confidence. But he says there is still much more to be done - and Bob, wholeheartedly agree.
The years just ahead hold out tremendous potential for Minnesota. We have every reason to believe that the best is not behind us, but rather lies directly ahead.
We will not get there by accident. You and I must commit ourselves to a path that will lead us to safe communities, strong families and good jobs. We must not be afraid to embrace the values that have made this state a shining star -- values of individual responsibility, respect, trust, hard work and honesty.
When I look at my own three children and my brand new granddaughter - I want so much for them. I want them to have more opportunities - more than I did. I want your children and my children and the young people here today to inherit a better world and a better state than we did. And I believe they will.
Minnesota is back on track. We know where we're going. Working together, we can get there from here.Mr. Speaker, President of the Senate, fellow constitutional officers, distinguished former governors, members of the supreme court, members of the cabinet, fellow Minnesotans...
Today we are at a crossroads. As I mentioned in my Inaugural address, there is a tremendous transition going on - in Washington, in Minnesota and in every state in the union. We are witnessing the most significant change of direction in national policy since President Franklin Delano Roosevelt created the New Deal.
In 60 years, we have gone from a nation with too little centralized power to a nation with way too much. And instead of making intelligent changes during the 1950s, 60s, 70s and 80s, we allowed more layers of government to be created. In the process we built up a wall between the citizen and his or her government. Today that wall is coming down.
The taxpayers will be heard and this legislative session is the taxpayers' session.
I want to make one thing absolutely crystal clear and that is that we, as a state, cannot choose to do nothing. That was made abundantly clear last week when a report entitled "Within Our Means" by Minnesota Planning documented that Minnesota has a structural budget gap - a gap that will add up to $25 billion by the year 2005. It is caused by changing demographics, which we cannot control, but also by our spending choices, which we can control. And rest assured, we will control spending.
Over the next ten years, we will experience major increases both in the number of school-age children and in the number of Minnesotans reaching retirement age; and together these factors will create an enormous bulge in government costs. Combine this with the expection that the number of working people - taxpayers - will level off, and we are left with a gaping hole between spending and tax revenues.

The report made it clear that if we continue to spend the way we spend today, Minnesota will be facing budget cut upon budget cut over the next 10 years. Something has to give, and in Minnesota, it will not be the taxpayer.
So the challenge of this transition is to learn to live within the new fiscal realities of our time - to do things differently. And within that context we must be very disciplined in identifying exactly what our priorities will be.
The people of Minnesota have made their priorities abundantly clear:
· They want a government that lives within its means and that means no general tax increases;
· They want an educational system that will allow their children to emerge as winners in the world economy. And they want communities and schools and streets that are free from violence.
· And they want a smarter, more efficient and more local government;
I want us to think anew about state government and push the highest degree of accountability down to the lowest level of governance.
On the national scene, we are seeing a shifting of power from the federal government to the states. Central to our budget proposal is an unprecedented plan to begin to shift the power of government back to the people. Let us launch an all-out war on expensive and ridiculous mandates be they from the federal government or from the state.
As governor, I can tell you how federal mandates have often taken common sense out of the work place.
For example, the federal government now requires that a full 10 percent of prison cells in each of our state prisons be wheelchair accessible. In Minnesota, 10 percent equals 400 cells. Yet here in Minnesota, we only have 20 inmates - yes 20 inmates - using wheelchairs, and 14 of them are in the geriatric prison in Faribault. So unless this mandate is lifted, we will be forced to spend millions and millions of taxpayer dollars to create accessible space for 400 disabled inmates that we don't have.
2

I'm for access and equality, but this is an absurdity. Once again, we see the great wall erected between the common sense of the people and the determined will of the political elite who always seem to know better.
At the state level, that wall will come down.
We will shift power away from the state bureaucracy back to the people. And we will do it by removing burdensome mandates and allowing communities to set their own priorities and make their own decisions through the use of flexible funding in the form of block grants.
Give people the tools and they will be far more creative and far more effective than any centralized government could ever be.
For example, in Rush City I visited a family center used by all of the families in the community - rich and poor, one-parent and two, struggling and successful. The center was built by the community, literally - they built the climbing equipment, and a local businessman generously donated the space. At this center kids can get their immunizations, parents can get support from other parents and families who are struggling can get the help they need. They did this with a block grant.
As more and more people get involved locally, they need and deserve more information about how their local tax dollars are spent. Minnesotans want us to provide meaningful information about how much each service costs and who is charging them for that service. And so we will introduce a substantial revision of "truth-in-taxation" so that every Minnesotan knows what they are getting and at what price.
State and local governments must also change. Today more than half of the state budget is returned to local governments. All of us can be more efficient. I support restructuring at the state level and our administration will drive those changes. But all management decisions must rest with the managers, not the legislature. And any changes we make must result in, one, cost savings for the taxpayer and, two, improved service to the taxpayer.
Let us not reorganize to make ourselves feel better - let's do it to give the people of Minnesota more value for their dollar.
3

And while the nation as a whole contemplates great change, I think it is only fitting that the Minnesota Legislature let the people participate in shaping the size and scope of their government. There is no better example of costly duplication in this state than the continuation of a burdensome two house system and it's ab~ut time we allowed the people to vote on a unicameral legislature.
And the people must be given the opportunity to vote on term limits. No legislative body has the right to maintain the big wall that protects them from the people.
I want to redefine the role of government to become a flexible agent of opportunity, not a road block to success.
There is no more tragic example of the misuse of mandates than the federal mandates on welfare.
Today we have a system that rewards teenagers for having children out of wedlock. We have a system that tells people the more children they have, and the less they work, the better off they will be. We give young parents a financial incentive for splitting up.
This is not a compassionate system, nor is it a helpful system. It is a social catastrophe. And we will not allow it to continue.
That is why I want Us to get very serious, very quickly, about welfare reform. And I hope
the federal government will have the wisdom to do the same by giving states the immediate flexibility we need to change.
Minnesotans want welfare reform. And when I say reform, ata minimum, I mean the following:
· First, any welfare reform proposal that I sign will eliminate, overnight, all welfare for able-bodied adults without kids. They should never have been on welfare in the first place.
· Second, I want to make sure that first time welfare applicants who have children have a very clear understanding of their obligation. And that obligation is to work. We will provide you with assistance in a variety of areas, but there will be no welfare check. We want people in need to succeed and the way to succeed is through employment.
Work is not punishment. Millions of Minnesotans go to work everyday in factories and offices and restaurants and warehouses - and they do it to pay their bills. Why should people on public assistance be taken off the hook?
· Third, I want us to expand a successful experiment we launched last year in seven counties called the Minnesota Family Investment Program. Participants in this program can work, yet still receive some assistance for a period of time. The program tries to serve as a sturdy, one-way bridge out of welfare, and preliminary numbers show that it is working.
· Fourth, we can require teenage parents to live with their own parents as a condition of receiving assistance. We want family members to come together in times of need.
· And finally, we can continue our growing commitment to child support enforcement. In fact, at the end of this month, we will be publishing in local newspapers the names of the 100 parents who owe the most in unpaid child support. It's sad that we must go to this extreme to hold some people responsible for the well-being of their own children.
These are the ingredients of a bill we will sign.' The people of Minnesota have said they want welfare reform. And they expect a proposal from the legislature that is not cluttered with controversial amendments. Every idea has the right to stand or fall on its own merit. And by the way, these are the legislature's rules.
I want us to give people a ticket out of welfare and instill the spirit of success in every child.
Our focus must be to make absolutely certain that every child has the opportunity to succeed and win in the world economy - first through a world-class education system and secondly, through the creation of good, high-paying jobs.


We owe it to our children to reorganize our services for children. Once and for all, we want a Department of Children and Education Services to serve the needs of young people from birth to career.. Working together, we can make this a reality.
We envision a department that focuses on nurturing and challenging every child to success.
We now have more than 250 different children's programs scattered throughout 15 different state agencies. Let's take all those resources and roll them into one state department - eliminating the duplication, fragmentation and turf battles.
Through the use of block grants, the new department will be a resource, not a regulator, in helping local schools and communities solve problems.
I see a department that will assist local communities in working to meet the challenging graduation standards that will be implemented next year. Minnesota employers expect our students to meet higher expectations than in the past and every single Minnesotan wants our children to meet those expectations. They can, they will.and they must.
We now know that within five years, 70 percent of the available jobs in America will not require a four-year degree, but they will require specific job training. That is why the new department will be involved in bringing employers to the center of education reform. Every teacher and every school should make it their business to learn the needs of Minnesota employers.
We will foster the creation of local partnerships between schools and employers and expand the youth apprenticeship concept throughout the state. We want to direct our resources toward those things that will give more kids the opportunity to graduate from high school with the hope of securing a decent job. This will be a difficult budget year, but youth apprenticeship· MUST be a priority.
In the area of higher education, every institution should see itself as an integral part of Minnesota's economic engine - preparing people for the world of work. H we truly care about our young people, we will measure the success of higher education by the number of graduates who are placed in good, high-wage jobs - and we will invest in those positive results.

And finally, let's not forget, when our children do begin to look for work, they need a reason to stay in Minnesota. Those jobs will not come here by accident. The fact is we have a solid economy with one of the lowest unemployment rates in America. And while the median income is dropping nationally, it is increasing in Minnesota. While poverty is increasing in America, it is dropping in Minnesota.
But we also know that we have a huge wall that is a barrier to future success. And that wall is created by an uncompetitive workers' compensation system and a continued expectation of tax increases.
Rest assured that wall will come down.
I want Minnesota to enact meaningful reform that addresses the major cost-drivers in the system. Let's vow not to lose one more employer to high workers' compensation costs.
And let's vow today that we will work to bring Minnesota out of the top ten states in taxes. That's why I am pledging no new general taxes through 1998.
If we can reform workers' compensation and lose our reputation as a high tax state, Minnesota has the potential to become an economic powerhouse in the 21st century. And we must settle for nothing less.
Underlying all of this is the reality that no state can succeed if it does not have an overall sense of security and optimism. And that cannot happen if people live in fear of violence. Minnesotans want to be able to walk the streets and feel safe, and they want to know that their family members are secure. We all share this goal, and we can achieve this goal together.
Let me share with you what the people of Brooklyn Park have done. For years, they watched as their community began to deteriorate, their crime rate marched upward and long time residents began to move out.
In the fall of 1993, they decided to act. Through an initiative called "Come Home to The Park" involving thousands of volunteers they have brought pride and growth back to their city. Apartment owners and property owners have cleaned up and fixed up their buildings. With the help of 160 new neighborhood watch programs and a very active business community, the serious crime rate dropped 20 percent last year.

Everyone feels good about Brooklyn Park again. Police Chief Don Davis, and former mayor, Jesse Ventura are here today and I salute you and all the people of your community. Rest assured, our Department of Public Safety will do everything it can to work with local police and strengthen our commitment to safe neighborhoods. People working together can make their neighborhoods, safe. Let us further understand that no matter how many programs we create, no matter how many prisons we build or how many police officers we put on the street, ultimately the strength of our communities rests in the values that bring us together. We in government have been reluctant to discuss values for fear of political labeling. But the truth is, this nation was formed by those who were committed to values. We want our children to grow up believing in honesty, hard work, discipline, mutual respect and a commitment to family and community. Each of us has an obligation to make certain that our children embody those values. Now the people have spoken. This is their hour. But you and I, as elected officials, should cast aside our political differences and work together on their will. For there is no more noble mission than one in which we walk hand-in-hand toward a future that once again ranks Minnesota as the finest place to live in the world.My fellow Minnesotans.
Much has been made about the selection of this location and this audience for the state of the state address. Some have questioned the decision to move the speech outside of the traditional Capitol chambers. Some have questioned the decision to speak to an unconventional audience, full of entrepreneurs and job creators from across Minnesota.
Well, I must admit: the critics are on to something. We picked this place and this audience precisely because our times demand that we break old conventions, alter old habits, and revise old ways of doing business.
We want change, reform, and growth for Minnesota, and I salute you for helping to lead the way. More broadly, it is Minnesotans themselves -- both in and out of this room -- who are demanding change, reform, and growth. It is now the task of those of us in government to respond and to deliver.
Join me, and together, we will.
We are trying something else new tonight. We are using technology -- video, computer graphics, photos, and other visual images -- to highlight this address. We do this not only to benefit the audience, but to illustrate our commitment to change, to emphasize the need to embrace the future, to think and act anew.
with that said, I suggest there is no better way to begin than to listen to what our fellow Minnesotans think of the state of the state, and to tell us, in their own words, how we can improve it.
As you can see, Minnesotans welcome change. In fact, they demand it. And they know what I know: that when Minnesotans unite, and work together towards a goal, there is little we cannot achieve.
I know this because five times I've come before the Legislature in a state of the state address and five times we have accomplished big things together. We have built a record of reform and results of which we can all be proud.
Take our biggest challenge, fiscal reform. When I first spoke to you as Governor, the state faced a $1.8 billion budget deficit. Our state spending was growing 15 percent faster than inflation and outpacing personal income. The state's bond rating had slipped and our financial house was in complete disarray.
Five years later, look what we have accomplished. We now have a $824 million surplus, not a deficit. We have stood firm against increases in taxes and have even cut some. Minnesota is now ranked among the top four states in financial management and we have reclaimed our AAA bond rating. Thanks to the Price of Government Resolution passed last year, we are actually on course to reduce the state's claim on personal income from 18.4 to 17.7 percent over the next five years.

The big spenders said it would never be done, but we held firm, and we all won.

Take health care reform. Three years ago, 95,000 Minnesotans

including 4,100 families could not afford private health

insurance. Today I thanks to MinnesotaCare I we are helping these

families get the quality care they need; care that keeps babies

and pregnant mothers healthy; care that keeps children well, in

school, and ready for success.


The critics said it could not be done, but we insisted it could, and we all won.

Take welfare reform. Just last spring, I signed a landmark bill that rewards work, helps families stay together, and eliminates welfare altogether for employable adults without children. Overnight, we have begun to transform the cycle of welfare dependency and despair into an action plan for work, opportunity, and hope. What is more, the twin reforms of health care and welfare are actually helping the'state to save money: some $200 million last year alone.

The status quo said it should not be done, but we demanded change, and we all won.

Take workers' compensation reform. The cost of Minnesota's workers' compensation system hit $1.2 billion in 1993, an all-time high. Prior to the reforms passed last year, Minnesota's rates averaged 25 percent more than neighboring states, driving businesses out of the state, despite a better safety record. Thanks to our joint efforts, the bill I signed cuts premiums up to 25 percent. It rewards employers for safe workplaces, reduces lawsuits, and helps those most in need.

The nay-sayers said it must not be done, but we did it, and we all won.

In the end, however, our success is not measured by the volume of our legislative work or by the number of decisions made at the state Capitol. What matters is that Minnesotans are enjoying wider economic and social success.

Personal income is up. From 1990 to 1994, income per person in Minnesota grew 18.5 percent, outpacing the national average. Our ranking among the states in personal income moved up from 19th to 16th.

Job creation is up. Minnesota grew 240,000 new non-agricultural jobs between 1991-95, a pace nearly twice the national average. Unemployment is down. Minnesota's jobless rate in November was just 2.8 percent, less than half the national average.

Our economy is the strongest in the Midwest. In a state-by-state comparison, the Corporation for Enterprise Development ranked Minnesota as having the nation's fifth best job market and the region's best overall economic performance. They also ranked us as enjoying the highest quality of life. Minnesotans worked hard to build this record of success and we are not going to let the spenders, the nay-sayers, or the critics take it away.

These are not just statistics, positive as they are. The real story is that broad economic success allows Minnesotans to pursue their dreams, from owning a home to buying a business. It allows them to provide for their families, to save for their children's education, to plan for their retirement. It means more than money, more than material. It means lives less burdened by worry, lives more full, lives more free.

Despite these successes, problems remain: problems that are testing our faith in the American dream, in our hopes for a better community, state, and nation. Left ignored, they threaten to undue all we have accomplished together.
First, too many of our schools --- especially in Minneapolis and St. Paul --- are failing, and large numbers of our children are failing, too. Over six years, we have increased spending on education 57 percent --- almost ten percent per year --- and yet scores for most students in our core cities are declining.
Consider Minneapolis. According to tests reported by the Minneapolis school district, the percentage of fifth graders who passed basic math dropped 14 points in just five years. The percentage dropped 11 points on the basic writing test and 10 points for reading. These are the results despite the fact that per pupil funding in Minneapolis has risen to $9,200, almost 50 percent more than the average school district.
Consider St. Paul. The four year drop out rate for grades 9-12 is more than 50 percent, according to St. Paul's own statistics. For native American children, the rate climbs to 78 percent, for African Americans it hits 67 percent, for Hispanics, 65 percent. My friends, this is nothing short of wholesale crisis.
Minnesota simply cannot compete and win in the global economy if we accept such widespread failure as "good enough." Nor can Minnesota afford the social costs of more street crime, massive expansions in our welfare rolls, and more stress on our already over-burdened justice system.
We cannot afford dawdling and delay, we must move to reform education now. Join me, and together, we will.
Second, despite tougher sentences, crime is up, and people feel less safe. Last year, we saw an unprecedented explosion of violence in Minneapolis. A city once known nationally for its exceptional quality of life and as a vibrant business and cultural center now generates stories about its soaring murder rate --- 97 last year.
Violence has also become more random. Innocents and bystanders are being killed, creating tragedy for their families and raising fears for all.
The costs of responding to this social breakdown are also spiraling out of control. Violent crime among juveniles has climbed 260 percent, thereby driving up incarceration rates. If we continue at this pace, Minnesota will be forced to build a prison every two years, at a cost of $100 million each.
We must change this course. Join me, and together, we will.
Third, Minnesotans feel anxious about job security, and sense that their quality of life is threatened. Major corporations are downsizing, laying off hundreds, sometimes thousands of employees. High-pay, high-benefit middle management jobs are being slated for extinction, as companies rush to stay competitive in the global marketplace.
Many middle class families are finding it difficult to get ahead, with the big bite of taxes and the press of monthly bills. Even many double-income households are one paycheck away from debt, one downturn away from the unemployment line.
These are the realities and complexities of life in the middle 1990s. Times have changed, and we must change with them. Join, me, and together we will.
The old ways will not work. We cannot tax are way out of these problems; more taxes will only reduce, not increase, our social


and economic well-being. We cannot spend our way out of these problems. The state and local governments already face future budget shortfalls of $8 billion by 2001. We cannot look to Washington, D.C., for salvation Ñ thanks to reformers there, the federal government is finally attempting to live within its means. But that means less for Minnesota.
One thing is clear: past approaches are outdated, ineffective, or unaffordable. We need bold approaches, fresh thinking, and new ways of doing business.
The comprehensive report, prepared at my request by former Congressman Vin Weber and former state Senator John Brandl recommending ways to solve our upcoming budget gaps, highlights this fresh thinking. I urge the state Legislature and all Minnesotans to give their proposals serious consideration, because this Administration certainly will.
But I also want to offer my strategy for managing the new realities, my plan for meeting Minnesota's challenges.
Three years remain in my term and what I outline now is my three year plan. Before I get to other specifics, however', I suggest we focus first on rebuilding our confidence in lawmakers and democratic institutions. That confidence has been shaken lately by Phonegate, by criminal probes of legislators, by headline stories of unethical conduct.
Let us face it: public officials have a credibility gap. To be credible reformers, we must first fix our own system. For too long, it has been too open to abuse of power, too prone to excessive influence by special interests, too removed from the will and aspirations of the people.
I propose comprehensive legislative reform. I do not refer to tweaking around the edges. I mean full scale change that lets the public know we mean business.
This session, I will offer a package that will restrict per diem only to days the Legislature is actually in session. Taxpayers should not be asked to pick up the tab unless the people's business is being done.
We must end certain conflicts of interest, like requiring a member to excuse himself or herself from voting on matters relating directly to their occupation. We must require the state auditor to audit the Legislature. In the past, the Legislature has tried to audit itself, an arrangement that lacked proper distance and oversight.
We must apply all laws to the Legislature itself. Inexcusably, the Legislature has excused itself from affirmative action and pay-equity laws, strict civil service code and collective bargaining agreements, and a variety of other special arrangements.
The Legislature should live by a simple rule: if a law is good enough for the people of Minnesota, it is good enough for legislators.
We must create a unicameral Legislature. Minnesota has the fifth largest Legislature in the nation and the cost of maintaining it is enormous. In 1972, it cost $8.5 million. In 1992, it cost $77 million. Let us pass a constitutional amendment for a one-house legislature.
We must provide for initiative and referendum. The state Capitol is not the repository for all wisdom. Let us give the people the chance to express their will on the ballot.
And I want term limits. Term limits will inject new blood, new vitality into a system too often controlled by the vested, and the entrenched. No politician is so valuable he can't be furloughed.
These reforms will restore trust and confidence in our system. Before I leave office, I will insist that comprehensive legislative reform becomes law.
One area where we have already built public trust is in fiscal management. We have done so because we held firm to our conviction that good financial planning -- living within our means -- is a necessary first step to good government. Our efforts have paid off with a $824 million surplus.
I know there will be a rush to spend this money a hundred different ways. Some legislators remind me of a teenager with a new credit card: they never met a spending limit they could not exceed.
But I tell you: this is not the politician's money, it is the taxpayer's money. Minnesotans worked hard to provide it. And as long as I am Governor, we will respect their labors and we will not squander their hard-won surplus.
We will not propose dramatic new spending, but we will request targeted investments, targeted tax relief, and wise planning for the future.
Out of the $824 million, some $200 million comes about due to savings as a result of health and welfare reform, we will spend just $160 million on our top priorities. Those priorities include crime enforcement and prevention, youth jobs and intervention, and education technology and reform.
We will target $24 million to tax relief, $100 million over four years. These tax cuts will help retain and create jobs in Minnesota and will help parents provide advanced education for their children.
All the rest --- nearly two-thirds of a billion dollars --- we will save.
The first $140 million will go to the budget reserve we created last year to help us prepare for federal cutbacks, an economic downturn, and future shortfalls. The balance --- some $500 million --- will be saved.
But make no mistake: we will not surrender it up to the spenders. During my time in office, I have built something of a reputation for using the veto pen. If the spenders in the Legislature attempt to fritter away this surplus, I am going to relish the chance of adding to that reputation.
Within this framework, then, we will make targeted investments. The first must be to protect public safety because that is the first role of government. Nothing else can succeed --- not job growth, not social bonds --- unless we first are physically secure.
By public safety I do not mean safe only in certain areas, only at certain times, only if you are a certain sex, and only if you are a certain color.
I mean safe anytime, anywhere, no matter who you are, allover Minnesota.
We offer a two-track approach. The first is improved enforcement. Minnesota already has enough laws, tough sentences, and strong penalties in place. Our task now is to confront the gangs, the thugs, and the criminals directly on the streets.
Police Chief Wade Setter in Brooklyn Park provides a model for what works. This 17-year veteran supervises a force of 68 officers who patrol the streets and neighborhoods of that city. In the past five years, homicide, assault, burglary, larceny, and auto theft have all declined, thanks to neighborhood watch groups, citizen involvement, and community policing they helped organize.

I propose the "Safe Streets Initiative" to build on this success. Through this program, we will hire police on overtime to conduct neighborhood sweeps. During these sweeps, officers will strictly enforce all laws, including curfew, truancy, and traffic laws. police will develop street contacts, check for outstanding warrants, and generate intelligence on suspected criminals. The objective is simple: arrest all violators.

The sweeps will also be conducted across jurisdictions, using many law enforcement agencies. For example, the Hennepin and Ramsey County Sheriff's Departments will work with Minneapolis and St. Paul. Bloomington will work with Brooklyn Park, and Burnsville will work with Maplewood.

To the thugs who would prey on our citizens we say this: get out of Minnesota now, or you will pay the price. Stay, and you will do time.

We will build the effectiveness of law enforcement agencies by upgrading their communications systems. We will also insist on building up a full staff complement for the State Patrol. I will ask for 46 additional troopers to keep our motorists safe.

We will do more to strengthen community policing, to help citizens form block clubs and crime watch groups, and to build closer ties between law enforcement and the people they protect.

Through partnerships and teamwork, we can and we will take back our streets, our schools, our homes, and our neighborhoods.

Crime control also requires prevention. We must do more to give
our youth positive alternatives to life on the streets. We can start by investing directly in community programs that work, rather than in more government bureaucracies that don't. We want
to empower existing community organizations like YMCA's, neighborhood recreation centers, and church groups that reach out to at~risk juveniles.

A good example is the St. Paul Children's Youth Initiative,

supervised by Kathleen Vellenga. They run a program called the

Dad's Group, which helps men become more effective, more

responsive fathers. Given the high rates of teenage pregnancy

and single-parent families in the inner city, nothing could be

more important than strengthening fatherhood.


I also believe that the best anti-crime remedy ever invented is

something called a job. Work not only pays the bills. It builds

self-respect. It fosters personal responsibility. It strengthens

community.



That is why I propose to provide $6 million for summer jobs that will reach 5,000 at-risk youth. The need for this program is especially acute now, given federal cutbacks in this area. Let us agree to give these children a shot at success by giving them a shot at a job.

I also want schools to become full partners in crime prevention.
That is why I will call for $20 million to finance new construction or remodeling of schools and community centers that offer after-school enrichment programs. I will also propose $5 million in grants to three neighborhoods in St. Paul, and three in Minneapolis, that establish after-school enrichment programs. We will target those areas with especially high rates of poverty, teen pregnancy, and juvenile crime.

Some may not like these investments. But consider the alternative. In addition to social costs, criminal justice is the fastest growing part of the budget, up 25 percent in just two years. Left unchecked, these trends will soon crowd out spending in areas like education and health care. We must move now to change our course.

From the beginning, we have been committed to strengthening the twin pillars of job growth and quality of life because they define who we are as people, and as a state. In a competitive global economy, we dare not take them for granted. We must pursue an aggressive strategy that improves both.

I offer two examples from our bonding bill which illustrate what I mean by a commitment to quality of life. The first is our request to fund a new $34 million Science Museum of Minnesota on the riverfront in St. Paul.

The Science Museum is nothing short of a state-wide treasure. Its exhibits, displays, and films help minds, young and old, to understand and appreciate their world. And as a hub for St. Paul's riverfront redevelopment project, a new science museum
will do more than inform and enrich. It will serve as a draw for the entire area, bringing world-wide tourists and economic vitality with it. The Science Museum models how interdependent quality of life and economic success are.

We will also invest in Minnesota's natural resources and our citizen's love of the outdoors. Our entire environmental package will top $65 million next year, $174 million over six years. But one program exemplifies our commitment.

The Reinvest in Minnesota program --- RIM is now ten years old and yet has never been fully funded. RIM helps retire marginal land for the benefit of water, soil, fish, and wildlife. Fully 1.4 million Minnesotans bought hunting or fishing licenses last year, pouring $1.5 billion into our economy to pursue their pastimes. They, and we, want to conserve our natural resources for our children and grandchildren. That is why I am proud to fund RIM at $12 million on its 10th Anniversary and I ask the Legislature to approve it.

We also must have a strategic approach to job creation. We propose to advance the sales tax exemption on capital equipment, bringing the rate down to zero by January, 1998. We do this because equipment-intensive sectors, including forest products, printing, and value-added agriculture are among the biggest, and most productive, in Minnesota. Cutting this tax means jobs, pure and simple.

We also propose targeted tax relief to entrepreneurs who invest in our core cities, bringing employment and opportunity with them. We want areas that had been red lined by businesses to become red hot with the energy and vitality of new jobs.

We will push for development of new products in agriculture and related industries, which provide one in nearly four jobs in Minnesota. We are especially excited by the possibilities of value-added products, which are turning soybeans into building materials; corn into fuel; and in the future, alfalfa into electricity.

But perhaps our most exciting proposal is in the field of medical
technology, a $2 billion industry in this state. Minnesota is home to 500 medical product companies employing 16,000 people, ranking us second in the nation. Our medical expertise at the University of Minnesota and the Mayo clinic has built a national and international reputation.

The best is exemplified by Dr. Frank Cerra, Dean of the Medical School, and Dr. Wei-Shou, inventors of an artificial liver. The product they developed is called the Regenerex machine, which will help support the livers of patients until they can receive a



liver transplant. They now need funding in order to seek FDA approval.
There are other obstacles. For example, researchers at the University are working on 21st century problems in labs developed 50 years ago, using equipment that in some cases dates back 20 years. Unless we act now, Minnesota could lose hundreds, even thousands of jobs to high-tech states like California·.
Our plan is to make the University of Minnesota a medical technology resource center second to none and to create a seamless "medical alley" to Rochester Mayo. That is why I am asking for $6.5 million to upgrade the university's medical research facilities. We have an urgent need for more lab space with the latest equipment.
We want to make sure that when bright ideas are developed, they get turned into marketable products. This is called "technology transfer," a service provided by a state funded organization known as Minnesota Technology. Minnesota Technology does a good job; we want them to do even better, which is why they are working closely with our Department of Trade and Economic Development to make sure that Minnesota's brightest minds get connected to Minnesota's best entrepreneurs.
That's how Minnesota gave birth to Medtronic, which now employs 5,000 in Minnesota and generates $2 billion in business a year. Win Wallen, the company's Chairman of the Board, put it succinctly: "without the University of Minnesota, Medtronic never would have located here." We want the Medtronics of the future to say the same thing: we will grow in Minnesota.
We cannot prevent or reduce crime, grow jobs, or create long-term economic and social opportunity unless we first reform our education system. To do that, we must be honest about its problems.
Before I address those, let me first say that I know many parents strongly support their public schools and are pleased with the quality of their children's education. They are right to be proud. Public schools in Edina, Fergus Falls, Willmar, Burnsville, Kenyon-Wanamingo and hundreds of other communities in Minnesota work and work well. I salute the parents, teachers, administrators and school boards in them all.
But those successes cannot blind us to our failures. While it is true our college bound students are doing pretty well, our non-college bound students are falling further behind. For example, just 10 of 53 elementary schools in Minneapolis scored at or above the national average on the California Achievement Test.
Employers are the first to pick up on this low achievement. A majority of employers in Minneapolis and St. Paul report that over half of today's job applicants lack basic skills in math, reading and writing.
Those who embrace the status quo are quick to quibble over statistics. But I ask you: how many ways must we count failure --- how many more children must we lose --- before we admit the problem and begin providing solutions?
I say this: the time for delay is over. The time for leadership is now and I intend to provide it.
We have a mUlti-front strategy aimed at freeing up teachers, schools, parents, and children and giving them the tools they need to succeed.
First, we want to give teachers more freedom: freedom to receive rewards for outstanding work in the classroom in the form of merit pay. Teaching is a noble profession. Few roles in society are more important than that of educator and mentor. We entrust our very future to those who would excite and expand young minds.
Merit pay rewards excellence. Merit pay spurs performance. We want our good teachers to be well compensated and for school districts to have incentives to recruit and retain them. We will seek merit pay for teachers.
We want to loosen teacher tenure. Too often, tenure locks in mediocrity and locks out our finest young teachers. Is it not an injustice against children when three Teachers of the Year in the past 15 years are not rehired because of tenure? We must put a premium on excellence, not seniority. We will seek changes in tenure.
We also want binding arbitration. We support the right of teachers to bargain collectively. But when both sides negotiate in good faith, should we not resolve the dispute through an honest broker, a neutral third party? Must we hold six, seven, and eight year-old children hostage to a labor dispute? We will seek binding arbitration.
I spoke of freeing up teachers. We also must free up schools. We will say to schools: tell us the mandates that are blocking your path to excellence and we will remove them. We are not in the procedure business. We are not in the inputs business. We are in the results business. If a mandate is an obstacle to achievement, we will not balk. It will be waived.
We will also invest in technology. I propose $22 million for hardware, software, and communications technology for Minnesota's public schools. Some of that money will expand fiber optic lines, some will purchase computers, some will buy programming. We want a student in Blackduck to learn French via the Internet while the student in Eagan writes a term paper using the Library of Congress. We want to equip our children with the computer literacy skills they will need to excel in the workplace of the future.
We will also get business involved. We will expand our program to refurbish computers donated by the private sector, a program which also builds partnerships and relationships schools need to succeed. Our goal is to put Minnesota schools in the top five in technology.
Most importantly, we must free up parents. The best school districts already are responsive to parents, already seek out and value their views. But we must do more to empower parents, to put them in charge of their children's educational destiny.
One way is to offer parents an education IRA, a program we call Edvest. We propose to allow parents to create a special tax free savings account for higher education and to exempt the."first $4000 they deposit into it each year. The private sector and non-profit organizations will also be encouraged to donate matching funds.
My friends, this is a tax cut for families working to educate their children and I say it's about time.
This program embodies our belief that, given the proper tools, parents will invest in their children's future. We trust parents more than institutions to make the best decisions on behalf of their children and to take responsibility for the results.
This is why we embrace parental choice. We want to give children from moderate and low-income families the same opportunities the affluent already enjoy. Our plan builds on open enrollment, which Minnesota passed in 1987 amid many of the same objections we are hearing now. We want to expand the range of choices to include private and parochial schools. Our choice pilot program includes Minneapolis, St. Paul, Brooklyn Center and one outstate school district.
with choice, we not only get more freedom, we get more competition. And we want to promote competition between schools. The truth is that competition spurs excellence. Competition keeps the focus on outcomes. Just as Detroit auto companies were forced to innovate, change, and improve thanks to foreign competition in the 1970s and 1980s, schools will improve thanks to school choice.
Let us not allow a whole generation of Minnesota children to slip away. Let us not allow the forces of inertia and the status quo to keep us from doing what is right.
I pledge today: Minnesota parents will have school choice.
with the 1996 legislative session now underway, I hear many things. Some say we should do little this year and next. Maybe just fine tune the budget, embrace the status quo, coast, simply manage the ride. But that is not why we are here. And that defensive posture escalates the social price.
It means even lower public trust in democratic institutions. It means chronic budget cuts or chronic tax increases. It means accepting failure in many inner city public schools. It means escalating crime rates and violence. It means a new 600-bed prison every two years. It means losing ground to global competition, the steady erosion of high-paying jobs and Minnesota's quality of life.
My friends, it is irresistible: Change will overwhelm the status quo. The only question is whether we make change our enemy or our ally.
Simply put, we have an exciting journey ahead. It represents an opportunity for all of us to more closely define and protect the one ingredient that brings us all together and that is our love for the quality of life in Minnesota. The fact is, whether you live in Warroad or Caledonia or Worthington or Duluth, we like life in Minnesota. We expect government to prevent harm and to enhance success.
Tonight I outlined in the State of the State new job creation opportunities that will allow us to continue to out-pace national growth, new partnerships that link our great Universities with the Mayo Clinic and the private sector, unprecedented access to computers for all of our children, and a prevention program that is second to none. These are not concerns that are either Republican or Democrat and they cannot be defined or measured according to the normal political slide rule. The fact is, we recognize change and we want to harness that change for the betterment of all people.
I want all of us to cast aside that which divides and begin moving in the direction that defines a better Minnesota, a safer Minnesota, a more opportunistic Minnesota and a winning Minnesota.
The truth is my friends, this is a marvelous state and you and I are going to work together to make it even better. We want to make absolutely certain that we give to our children no less than what our parents gave to us. And we want their children to have the same shot at happiness and success.
We remain committed to that agenda, to that goal, to that dream.Thank you. Speaker Carruthers, President Spear, fellow constitutional officers, members of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeals, former Governors, members ofthe Minnesota Legislature, friends and Minnesotans.
It is with great pleasure that Lt. Governor Joanne Benson and I come to share with you, the people of Minnesota, our optimism for Minnesota's future. Today, I will share my goals for this upcoming session, my thoughts on the last six years and my vision for where we are headed.
As you know, this will be my last major State of the State address. I want you to know what a pleasure it has been to work with this distinguished body over the past six years and what an honor and privilege it is to serve as Governor of this wonderful state. I want to thank the many people in this room and throughout Minnesota who have worked with me.
It has been my pleasure to work with the legislative leaders of both parties: Senate Majority Leader Roger Moe; Senate Minority Leader Dean Johnson; House Minority Leader Steve Sviggum and former House Speaker Irv Anderson. And I look forward to a good working relationship with our new House Speaker, Phil Carruthers. Congratulations on your election, Speaker Carruthers.
I must admit, it has not always been easy being a governor from one party and working with a Legislature of the other party. Often we have been at odds over issues. Yet, in the end, we have formed coalitions and alliances and set aside partisan politics for the well-being of the state.
One thing I have discovered as Governor, is the incredible spirit of community in our state. I have seen it in the willingness of Minnesotans to roll up our sleeves and work together to preserve and enhance the future of our children, the beauty of our surroundings, and the economic vitality of our cities, neighborhoods, towns and countryside.
And, when confronted with a crisis, we go out of our way to help. Whether it is our farmers during the crisis of the 1980s, the floods of the 1990s, or the blizzards of this winter, Minnesota does pull together.
And by working together, I would argue that we in Minnesota have accomplished more significant reform over the last six years than any state in America.


Financial management

At my first State of the State Address, I spoke about how Minnesota was in financial crisis. State spending exceeded revenue by $800,000 per day. Our budget was $1.8 billion in the red. Clearly, our financial house was not in order.

Since those early days, our administration has focused on long-term financial planning:

· We wanted adequate budget savings in case of a recession.

· We wanted to keep government spending below the rise in personal income.

· We wanted to avoid spending commitments that could not be kept.

· Controlling the growth in state spending led to 181 vetoes which prevented more than $1.5 billion in new taxes, spending, and fees. I want to again thank the minority leaders who helped sustain these vetoes -- Steve Sviggum, Dean Johnson, and former minority leader Terry Dempsey who is with us today.

Without these vetoes, today we would not be discussing a $1.4 billion surplus.

Today:

· We have instilled a culture of responsible spending.

· We have regained our AAA bond rating from two of three credit agencies.

· Minnesota is ranked among the top five states in financial management and I say one of the two best in America.

· We have cut taxes by $356 million. And I am proud to say that we will be proposing a tax cut that will return $500 million to Minnesota taxpayers.

On top of that good news, for the first time in decades, our budget will have a long-term structural balance through the year 2002. And we met this week with Standard & Poors about restoring the final AAA bond rating.

Health Care/Welfare

In 1992, this Legislature, working on a bipartisan basis, adopted a comprehensive strategy to improve health care for all Minnesotans. This package of reforms, now called MinnesotaCare, is a national model for health care reform.

· Today, 95,000 low- and moderate-income Minnesotans who previously had no health insurance now have coverage under MinnesotaCare.

· 35,000 families and 52,000 children now have coverage. The percentage of uninsured Minnesota children has been slashed by 43 percent.

· With our expansion of the MinnesotaCare program last year, an additional 45,000 individuals will be covered by 1999.

In combination with our successful welfare reform plan, we have given families enough help to make the jump from welfare to work. This means many more children are being raised in families where work is a way of life.
· Today, 4,000 fewer Minnesota families are relying on w~lfare benefits.

· We have cut state spending for welfare by more than 21 percent.

· Together, reforms in health care and welfare have saved our taxpayers more than $200 million.

· The foundation of our welfare reform philosophy is work. And the key to putting people to work is creating jobs.

Look at the jobs area:

· We have created 313,000 new jobs.

· With an unemployment rate at nearly half the national average, we are creating jobs 65 percent faster than the rest of the nation.

· And while manufacturing job growth has declined nationally, Minnesota is seeing modest growth, especially in Central Minnesota.

Our business climate today is more conducive to expansion and growth thanks to comprehensive workers' compensation reform.

· We have saved Minnesota employers $121 million, an overall 35 percent cut in premiums.

· Our system encourages workers to return to their jobs and discourages litigation.

Environment

As Minnesotans, we treasure and enjoy our environment like no other state in America. Where else but

Minnesota can you enjoy the breathtaking beauty and year-round recreation offered by our lakes, rivers, parks and trails.

And as an administration, our commitment to the environment includes:

· Adoption of the nation's toughest wetlands law which protects this vital resource and provides local governments the authority to develop their own management plans.

· An unprecedented commitment to clean up the Minnesota River so it can once again be a recreational resource for our families.

· A sustainable development initiative that serves as a national model for how to merge the needs of business with the demands of our environment.

· And a partnership with business that produces better environmental results. Because the best way to get results is to work together.

Children's Issues

Finally, in the area of improving the well-being of children, Minnesota's accomplishments rank second to none. From the beginning, children have been a top priority of this administration. Our commitment has been emphasized with funding increases for children's programs that surpass any time in Minnesota history.

Over the past six years:

· We have taken bold steps to streamline services for children and families starting with the creation of the Department of Children, Families and Learning.

· Today there is a single children's agenda for the state of Minnesota -- something that has never existed before -- integrating all educational and social programs for kids and families.

· We have created incentives for communities to work together for the well-being of children.

· Today, 57 family service collaboratives bring community schools, community organizations and health professionals and social service workers together to share resources and ideas.

· And the results are impressive. In Blue Earth County alone we have seen a $296,000 savings in out-of-home placements and an increase in parent involvement in schools. Not only does this save money, but more importantly, it saves children.
In all of these areas, I can confidently report that we in Minnesota have accomplished more reform in the last six years than in any other state in America. Now, we must turn our attention to the challenges that lie ahead.


This afternoon, I would like to talk about community -- our community. As a whole, Minnesota is one community. We are proud of this community -- it gives us identity and defines our heritage. No matter where we live -- whether in Warroad or Worthington, Moorhead or Minneapolis, Togo or Tonka Bay-we are still one community.
As legislators, you bear the title of state senator or state representative. Your job is to balance the needs of your local districts with the needs of the state community as a whole. And, I know how difficult that can be at times.
On the opening day of this legislative session, I was struck by the words of Senator Roger Moe. "We are one state, we are one family," he said. He reminded us that we have a tendency to divide ourselves -- to pit rural Minnesota against the metro area, north against south, cities against suburbs.
Senator Moe, I want you to know, I fully agree with you. And as we look toward the future, I pray that we will continue to work as one community.
And two areas where I hope we can agree are the need for property tax reform and pay raises for our state agency commissioners.
· Yes, I believe that commercial/industrial property taxes are too high -- number one in several categories. We must be honest if we plan on addressing property tax reform. High taxes affect our ability to grow jobs.
· That is why I have asked Revenue Commissioner Jim Girard to work with a bipartisan legislative group to address real property tax reform. We want to grow jobs in Minnesota.
· And it's time that the commissioners of our state agencies receive a pay increase. These people have not had a pay raise in more than 10 years. So I am asking you to pass a bill allowing pay raises for the commissioners, and I support increasing the pay of legislators and the judiciary, too.
Crime/Corrections
But let me be clear on community. A strong community cannot succeed if it cannot protect its own. The good news today is that Minnesotans feel safer in their community than they did three years ago. And overall crime rates have declined across America and in Minnesota.
Since 1991, my administration has made fighting crime a top priority. We have:
· Increased funding for courts and judges.
· Introduced strategies such as police street sweeps and community policing.
· Strengthened penalties for drive-by shootings, sex crimes and stalking.
· And made Minnesota among the toughest states in America for violent repeat offenders and crimes committed with a gun.
Crime statistics show that these efforts have made a difference. However, as overall crime has decreased, the number of violent juvenile offenders has increased dramatically. And certain inner city areas of Minnesota are literally under siege.
Statistics show that most juvenile offenders begin with small infractions and progress to more serious crimes, often because they suffer no consequences. To reverse this trend, we must target the first-time offender and send a message that no misbehavior will be tolerated. Let me make this clear -- the first-time offender cannot become a second-time offender.
· Through a partnership with the Minnesota National Guard, we will establish work camps at Camp Ripley where first-time juvenile offenders will clear brush, maintain roads and clean up facilities. I want kids working hard and learning to do something constructive as a team.
· Repeat or violent juvenile offenders will undergo more intense supervision and job training to give them the skills to succeed when they return home.
· The focus is on discipline.
Our crime plan also cracks down on high crime neighborhoods and gangs who prey on our community by peddling drugs and violence to our children. We will increase the visibility and presence of police through street sweeps and strict enforcement of all laws.
The success of this aggressive strategy, called Broken Windows, can be seen in New York City. In the last three years, this crime fighting strategy has led to a 39 percent drop in major crime. And the murder rate is at its lowest since 1968. I want the same dramatic results we have seen in New York City to be the reality here.
To keep kids from entering a life of crime, we will expand our aggressive prevention agenda by investing in effective, community-oriented programs which give our young people an alternative to life on the streets. We will target neighborhoods with especially high rates of poverty, teen pregnancy and juvenile crime. We want to keep our young people out of trouble.


We will also increase our focus on children and families with more targeted investments in programs which make a difference in the lives of our working families.
· We will increase funding for programs that help children even before they start school through programs such as Head Start, Early Childhood Family Education and Learning Readiness.
· We are proposing the biggest increase in child care dollars in state history to help welfare families move off government dependence and into the workforce.
· And we will increase support for families who work, particularly those families who are teetering on the edge of self-sufficiency but need a helping hand to pull it all together.
Welfare
Through our ground breaking welfare reform plan and increased aid to working families, we want to break the cycle of poverty. Children deserve the chance to grow up in families where there is work, structure and hope.
· With new strict time limits and work requirements, we will continue to target those individuals who lack the necessary job experience or education that can make them self-sufficient. We will help them become more self-sufficient.

Our administration is committed to working with businesses, big and small, to help provide these individuals withjobs. However, government's responsibility should not be to create jobs. Rather, government must create a climate in which grows quality jobs and produces skilled workers.
Therefore, I urge our businesses who have a shortage of workers to hire these individuals and give them a shot at independence. Both the individual and community will benefit. We will work with you to make this a reality.
Our goal is to make our communities safe and all of our people productive and contributing members.


But a community must also have soul. Our culture, our essence is captured by the arts.
· Our state's 30,000 artists and 1,700 arts organizations generate more than $1 billion each year for our economy.
· We have an active and growing film industry. Film and video production is now a $250 million per year industry that employs over 5,000 people.
But the arts are far more than dollars. The arts give our communities their identity. That is why I am proposing an arts initiative to help nonprofit arts organizations increase their touring activity in Greater Minnesota. Through increased funding we will help communities to create their own arts festivals--to celebrate, to honor creativity and to strengthen their identity.
I want all Minnesotans, no matter where they live, to be able to experience the arts and how they can enhance our communities and unite people from all walks of life. I can see community arts festivals, community theaters springing up -- let the sounds of music vibrate throughout Minnesota. I want Salsburg to talk about the Minnesota music festival.
Stadium
Like the arts, sports give us a strong community identity -- from our youngsters who play T-ball at the neighborhood park, to high school athletics, to our state's professional teams the Vikings, Twins, and Timberwolves. Truly, sports are a part of Minnesota's community.
So are the Minnesota Twins. On this issue, I urge you to look at outcomes. If we do not support the stadium, we will lose the Twins. I do not want our families to lose the opportunity to take their kids to a Twins game.
Yet, critics, say that we should not publicly support a private enterprise whatever the consequence. But, I remind you, community subsidies are part of our public policy. Through tax increment financing, through revenue bonds, and through direct government subsidies and grants.
Take for instance the budget our administration will be releasing next week. It includes $100 million in school aid reimbursements for tax increment financing. Communities throughout the state have committed public resources to help private businesses.
The state has aided other private ventures, too. For example:
· Northwest Airlines. If the state had not stepped in and provided Northwest a loan to keep their operations running, we would now be lamenting the loss of 20,000 direct jobs. An additional 110,000 jobs supported by the airport and $5.5 billion into our economy would have been severely cut back. And many other small and large companies would have looked elsewhere for a more convenient location. Not to mention that the state's pension fund benefitted from the Northwest deal.


We have also supported:
· A new potato plant in Park Rapids.
· A manufacturing company in Benson.
· An ice rink in Roseville.
· An exposition center in Worthington.
· Direct subsidies to political campaigns.
· And by the year 2000, we will have provided nearly $100 million to our state's ethanol industry.
If we as a community are to continue our successes of the past, we must ignore the critics and work together to forge solutions to the challenges we face.
This proposition goes beyond subsidy. For a ten cent tax on cigarettes, we can own 49 percent of the Twins as well as a $350 million outdoor stadium. That is a good investment.
Let me tell you today, I want the Twins to stay in Minnesota. And I will do what I can to bring hockey to St. Paul. Both are part of our communities' quality of life.

A sound community also prepares its young for responsible jobs and toward that end we can all agree on the importance of our higher education system in preparing our students for the challenge of the work place. When it comes to competing for jobs, our state has prospered, largely because of the quality of our workforce.
However, to ensure that our economy continues growth in dynamic, cutting-edge industries, we must form a closer partnership with our entire higher education system:
· It is crucial that we continue to support and strengthen our state colleges and our community and technical colleges in their effort to educate and train Minnesotans for jobs of the future. We to want work closely with Judith Eaton and the presidents of campuses in Bemidji, Mankato, Moorhead, Willmar, Winona, St. Cloud and Southwest State to make our system one of the best in the nation. For instance, students at Northland Technical College in Thief River Falls now each have their own laptop computer thanks to IBM.
· We must provide the University of Minnesota, the state's only research university, with the resources to foster new technologies that can drive our state's economic engine.
· I applaud the University's selection of Mark Yudof and am excited about a close working relationship to help him achieve his goal of making the University of Minnesota a leader in digital technology and one of the top five public institutions in America.
· I am confident that President Yudof will bring a new sense of excitement to the University and will sell that mission and sense of community statewide..
And we will continue our technology transfer initiative to develop more cutting-edge devices with our expertise at the University of Minnesota. By partnering with Academic Health Sciences we can bring ideas from the laboratory to the marketplace. Minnesota has over 500 medical product companies employing 15,000 people, ranking us second in the nation.


Our high school graduates must be prepared to work in a high tech economy.

But the red flags are waving. In a recent study, 42 percent of our employers report that our high school graduates lack necessary skills in reading, writing and math. And with one ofthe nation's tightest labor markets, demand for skilled workers will only increase.

· By the year 2000, 70 percent of all jobs will no longer require a college degree. But, they will require workers to have basic reading and math skills.

· However, our standardized tests tell us that one-third of eighth graders failed basic math and one-fourth failed basic reading.

· And 50 percent of the students in Minneapolis and 8t. Paul drop out.

Well let me tell you, my friends -- no successful community allows its children to fail.

And what is the price of this failure? From funding faulty outcomes through remedial education to the growing cost of our corrections system and welfare rolls, we spend upwards of $2 billion annually on the cost of failure. And this cost will only increase unless we focus on those children who are not making it.

We must do better. Last month I announced a package of reform to make schools accountable to students and families. We want to:

· Establish a statewide test to measure the performance of our students and our schools.

· Drive decision-making to the local level and allow school boards to enter innovative performance contracts to better student achievement.

· Develop charter schools free from government restrictions so they can use creative strategies to tickle the minds of our children.

· Partner with our state universities to put laboratory schools on campuses across Minnesota.

· Establish tax-free savings accounts for families who invest in their children's futures.

· Provide tax credits and deductions to expand choices for parents and students. The money can be used to:

1. hire a math tutor 2. enroll a student in foreign language classes 3. buy a home computer 4. attend a private school or home school a child.

And link every Minnesota school to the Internet and email.

I want Minnesota to be the number one state in computer technology.

For centuries, education has been the heart of the American dream.

To those of you who do not agree with our plan, I say, where is your plan? Do not underestimate my resolve on this issue.

Too many students are failing and we cannot afford to lose one more. I challenge every one of us to put students first.


As we look ahead to the 21st century, I am confident that Minnesota is poised for another exciting journey. It is a journey I pray we will encounter the same success we have seen over the last six years. A journey that will bring us closer together.

We have an incredible opportunity here. An opportunity to direct the needs of education to the child. A chance to make every system understand that our goal is to allow each child to reach his or her potential.

We can make our communities safer and become more committed to helping working families. We will make a commitment to the arts and building our soul within our community.

We can build a new baseball stadium without taxing the general public. We can refurbish the St. Paul Civic Center without taxing the general public.

We want a vibrant, growth-oriented economy which offers opportunity for all. We have taken the state from a deficit to a surplus. And we will cut taxes over $500 million this year.

Minnesota once was a national model. You and I working together are again going to make this the best state in America.Speaker Carruthers, President Spear, Chief Justice Blatz, members of the Supreme Court,

former Chief Justice Sandy Keith, Chief Judge Ed Toussaint, members of the Appellate

Court, former governors, Lieutenant Governor Benson, fellow constitutional officers,

legislators, friends and Minnesotans. And if I were to add all those desiring to run for

Governor, that would encompass the entire chamber.

You have been absolutely marvelous, and I thank you so much for both your kindness and all the courtesies that you have shown me over the past seven years. This past year, for all of us, has been a year of joy and personal sadness. We recently lost one of our most beloved Governors, C. Elmer Anderson of Brainerd, who served his state and his community so well for so long. He will always be a part of our memory and part of our history. We lost Ken Otremba and Barb Vickerman, two truly fine Legislators who exemplified the very best in public service. They, too, will always be a part of who we are. And Tim Bowe, the highly decorated State Trooper and a dear friend, who was truly one of Minnesota's finest. His loss was indeed painful.

On the other hand, we welcome to the Supreme Court our newest member, Jim Gilbert. We are delighted to have you and to also celebrate the elevation of Kathleen Blatz to Chief Justice.

I also want to take a moment to especially thank Sandy Keith for his leadership on the bench. When you look back over his splendid career, and I have admired it from a distance, and the closer I got to know him as Governor, the more I realized what a Minnesota treasure he has really been. He is truly one of Minnesota's greats, and we thank him on behalf of all Minnesotans for his service.

It is expected that the Governor of the State should comment on the state of the state. The truth today is that the state of the state is excellent. Minnesota is sturdy and well-prepared to enter the 21 st century. We are stronger financially, we are more prosperous and better prepared to take on the future than ever before in our history. And by forming partnerships, we have taken a state that was out of control in 1991, where we were spending $800,000 a day more than we were taking in, and we have been able, on a partnership basis, to turn that into a multi-billion dollar surplus. And we would not be talking about a $1.3 billion surplus, had we not cast, and had you not upheld, some 330 vetoes which blocked over $1.5 billion in new taxes, spending and fees.

Back in 1991, our budget reserves were exhausted, and now we have some $872 million in the bank -- money set aside to prepare us for whatever financial storms may lie ahead. We have repaid depleted reserves to the extent of $1.8 billion. Instead of spending 15 percent more than the rate of growth and personal income, we are now holding the rate of government spending below that key indicator. Incidentally, Minnesota's personal income is growing 30 percent faster than it is in the rest of America. We have not only halted the free-fall in our state's bond rating, but we have become the first state in some 24 years to recapture a triple-A bond rating from all three major financial rating institutions. There are only eight states in the United States that hold such a distinction. Perhaps best of all, we have gone from a state where we had cycles of endless tax and spending curves, and now we are in a position where we have so far been able to engage in more than a dozen tax cuts since 1991, giving back to taxpayers some $1.1 billion. And we are now proposing an addition of $1.7 billion in tax relief over the next five years, the largest in Minnesota's history.
I can accept the fact that a rising tide lifts all boats, and clearly we are delighted to be part of the national economy. But as Standard and Poor's indicated in their report, the economy is just a springboard. The other key is what you do with fiscal management. Now, we must also acknowledge that we could not have accomplished so much without adhering to the values embodied in this state and in its people -- values that call on us to grow first-rate jobs, to strengthen our quality of life and to show compassion for those in need. Minnesotans want a state where our children can find safety, opportunity, and breadth and richness of experience. We want a state that our children can be proud of, and today I am pleased to say I believe we are on that path.
Fifty-four thousand children who had no health insurance at the start of this decade are now covered through our MnCare program, ranking us second in the United States. We have become a national model for welfare reform, moving recipients not only into jobs, but much, much more importantly is lifting families out of poverty. 8,550 fewer families today rely on welfare than they did last year.
And while we are on the subject of jobs, we have also cut, on a bipartisan basis, workers' compensation premiums some 35 percent, saving employers $121 million and helping to create a competitive business climate that will continue to steadily grow jobs in Minnesota.
We have also begun to stem the rising tide of crime. In this last year, Minnesota has seen a decrease of seven percent in the most serious crimes, taking a step toward renewing our sense of security.
Now, I have reserved for the last reform, which is perhaps the most meaningful to me -education. We challenged the status quo and succeeded. We are now making decisions based upon what is best for the child, not the educational bureaucracy. And this month, for the first time ever, all of our public school students in grades three, five and eight are taking statewide standardized tests for reading and math, thereby giving parents, teachers, and the community a benchmark by which to judge their progress. Our first in the nation charter schools are setting new standards for innovation and flexibility. In just the last year, we have more than doubled to 30 the number of these creative schools. We have funded school technology, and within the next two years, we will be number one in America in the ratio of computers to students. For the first time ever, some of those students today are listening and watching this address on their computers at school via the Internet.
Our goal has been to put children first and, at the heart of all of our reforms, is our sincere belief that there must be competition in the educational system, whether public, private or parochial, every family in America should have the right to send their children to that school that best serves their child's needs.
Already, in this legislative session, there are those who seek to turn the clock back. But rest assured that, as Governor, I will do everything that I can to make certain that choice, competition, and quality continue to drive our commitment to education. I will fight to see that every single family in this state has the same educational choices for their children as the President, the Vice President, and all of our members of Congress.
We in America always define the American dream in the context of access to education. Millions of our families that came from foreign shores came here with that one ideal: that we could sacrifice our life, work hard so that our children could have access to the best educational experience, and on that basis, we could build the kind of egalitarian society that we all say that we want. We cannot, as a society, grant to the least -- the least amount of education -- but, rather, the same access that we give to those who have the most. That is what the American dream is all about. We in Minnesota will be the first state in America to realize that dream.
That also means that we are firmly committed to Minnesota's new graduation standards. The next century will demand more of our children, and we want to make absolutely certain that our children are prepared for that challenge. In all of this, as I have noted, we must be guided by those values that embrace Minnesota's people -- values, again, that call upon us to strengthen our quality of life, to show compassion for those in need and, first and foremost, to create an environment that is conducive to the growth of quality employment opportunities. Together, we have built an enviable record reforming education, reforming health care, reforming welfare, reforming state finances, reforming workers' compensation. The fact is that we have accomplished more solid reforms than any state in the United States.
Now, there will always be those who will look back and say, "Well, you can coast through the next Legislative session, while we await new leadership." But, I would remind them that competition waits for no one. Each and every year, we owe it to ourselves, and we owe it to the people of this state to endeavor to be better than we are. Now, granted, this state is enjoying its lowest unemployment rate ever. Granted, we are number one in the nation in job growth, more than 354,000 jobs have been grown over the past seven years. Granted, we have gone from a climate of job losses to one in which there are not enough skilled workers to fill available positions. The fact is, we do face new challenges. And we can either chose to ignore those challenges and see those successes gradually ebb away, or we can commit ourselves to change and to meeting the expectations that our people have of us. And to take advantage of the most precious resource that we have, which is our people.
It is my prayer that you and I, working together, can meet those challenges. We must strengthen the institutions that have always been the engines of job growth in this state -our institutions of higher learning. Never in our history has Minnesota needed higher education more than today. Never before have there been as many compelling reasons to justify bonding requests of $252 million for the University of Minnesota and $167 million . for the Minnesota State Colleges and Universities system, as well as those appropriations that are contained in our supplemental budget. These proposals must be funded in their entirety.
Now, much has been made of the size of the bond bill. But let me remind you that our package falls $200 million below our debt service guidelines. These requests are not simply requests for bricks and mortar. Our bill strengthens higher education. It enhances the environment and helps build communities throughout Minnesota. I want to thank Morrie Anderson, the new Chancellor at MnSCU for his leadership. He recognizes that 70 percent of the jobs we create in the future will not require a four-year degree but will require some post-secondary or technical training. To help students move into these jobs, part of our funding package calls for some $11 billion in new spending to forge partnerships between the MnSCU system and five high-growth Minnesota industries: precision manufacturing, computer software, printing and graphics, health and all of the occupations related to health and taconite production. Education and training programs in these key industries will be patterned after current successes. And what are they? A partnership with Northwest Airlines that will train air transport mechanics over the next two years. A partnership with IBM to help move students into high-paying jobs as computer systems network programmers. MnSCU is rapidly building a partnership between those people who create jobs and the whole system of education. That relationship, that partnership, is something you and I must invest in.
We also are blessed to not only have the outstanding leadership of Chancellor Anderson but also the vision of the new President of the University of Minnesota, Mark Yudof. In addition to his search for the all-American pancake, he has also laid out a sturdy vision for the future of the University and how it relates to all of us as citizens of the state of Minnesota. For over 150 years, we as citizens in this state, have invested in the University of Minnesota. In return, the University has given us educated citizens, advances in science and medicine, and a higher quality of life. Eighty percent of the students who graduate from the University of Minnesota remain citizens of this state.
Now, in order for these students to stay competitive with their peers across the nation and the world, we have proposed a number of key initiatives, including renovation of the Walter Library, a building in which all too few of us have spent any time. But it is truly one of the campus' oldest buildings, and the dream of the University of Minnesota is to transform it into a digital technology center. On the inside, students will have access to a state-of-the-art research facility. On the outside, we will preserve the building's elegant and distinctive architecture. We also proposed a new library at the University of Minnesota - Duluth's campus, designed to expand its capabilities into the largest information resource center in northeastern Minnesota. We proposed a new institute for molecular and cellular biology. As hard as it is for most of us to conceptualize, scientists have discovered that research at the cellular and molecular level is critical to scientific discovery. Through those discoveries, all of us win.
I want the University of Minnesota, through its research, to make us the lead state in the world in the development of medical technology. We have long excelled as a state in this area, and we must continue to be the leading light in medical education, medical training and medical research. Recall for a moment, that it was the University of Minnesota that trained Christiaan Barnard, who first performed the human heart transplant in 1967 and then went on to share his knowledge with countless other physicians. It was a year later that University of Minnesota physicians, Robert Good and Richard Hong made medical history by performing the world's first bone marrow transplant. And two decades later,

Minnesota was again inspiring the nation when a team led by Dr. Stuart Jamieson successfully performed the nation's first heart-lung transplant. That list goes on and on.
The reality is that the University of Minnesota and the Mayo Clinic are two of the finest medical institutions in the world, and we are committed to making absolutely certain that we give them the resources that are necessary for them to continue their work and to pursue excellence.
And it is for that reason that I am asking this Legislature to restore some $26 million in funding that was eliminated by the federal government. And why? To provide for medical research and medical education at both the University of Minnesota and the Mayo Clinic.
Now, if, as I have said, higher education is the engine that drives our job growth, then our business climate is the fuel that propels the train down the tracks. When I took office in 1991, one of the principal complaints was that Minnesota's high tax rates stifled economic growth. At that time, our commercial and industrial property tax rate stood slightly over 5 percent. It was far and away higher than our surrounding states, and very likely the highest in the United States. Now we have shrunk that rate down to some four percent. In the budget that I am submitting to you, I propose to reduce it down to the level of 3.5 percent and, for the apartment class, I want to reduce their rates down to 2.5 percent.
While this proposal will not cost the homeowner one dime, it will grow jobs, and it will grow our economy. In fact, if our plan is successful in this biennium and the next, tax relief will total some $2.4 billion. This spring, Minnesotans will receive a rebate equal to 20 percent of their property tax bill. We want that same tax relief extended through 1999. We believe that we must return the bulk of the surpluses to the taxpayers from whom it came.
But a large part of a healthy business climate also demands that we, as a state, follow on a very, very cautious and considerate course. We must have stable finances in order for our state to continue winning the competition for new jobs and new businesses.
As many of you know, I recently returned from a trade mission to Asia. I was privileged to have the opportunity to meet with the President of China, the Prime Ministers of Singapore and New Zealand, as well as their economic advisors. And I will tell you, it was sobering. The world faces a potential economic crisis if the United States and Japan do not act swiftly and wisely.
I left Asia wondering why, why we have shared in the upside of the market increase with record profits and then expect to not share in the downside. In light of those realities, I will again repeat my call for a separate reserve account dedicated to the Asian crisis. I want to make certain that we cushion any potential blow to our budget that may be caused by turmoil in those countries. Furthermore, I intend to ask this Legislature not only to set aside the $200 million I had previously recommended, but depending on the outcome of the February revenue forecast, to hold in reserve a total of $400 million, an increase of some $200 million. And then, if the impact of the Asian markets is less than anticipated and if the revenues prove to be sustainable, particularly in the out years, then the Legislature can come back with new leadership and use those funds to enact additional tax cuts. I think that is the prudent course for us to take as a state.

Lower taxes, a healthy economy and high quality jobs are the bread and butter issues that, by necessity, all of us care about. But Minnesotans value more than necessities. We also value that which enriches our souls. All those things, ranging from the arts to the great outdoors. Minnesota's outdoors are central to our quality of life. That is what we do with our families. We go to the lakes, we visit our state parks, we camp, we ski, we snowmobile, we hunt and some of us even try to fish. Our $202 million Access to the Outdoors initiative is an investment in an area that embodies our identity as a state. It builds upon this state's outstanding record of environmental protection, a record enhanced by more than $2.2 billion of investment since 1991, for projects that range anywhere from cleaning up the Minnesota River to improving our soil and air quality. This year, we seek to improve every state park in Minnesota. We want to add 100 miles of new trails, regenerate thousands of acres of forest and put many, many more acres into wildlife habitat. In addition, we want to make it simple to obtain recreational licenses through a one-stop shopping system that will be available at computer terminals all across the state.
Included in this comprehensive package is a new park of historic magnitude. It is the Veterans Memorial Park with the USS Des Moines as its centerpiece, to honor those to whom we owe our deepest debt of gratitude -- veterans who fought and died for the liberties that we now take for granted.
Those who served in World War II and the veterans of all wars, before and after, sacrificed greatly for us. Now they call upon us to make a small gesture in return. To those of you who have accused us of overzealousness on this project, I say that it is better to err on the side of caring too much than too little. I think it is better to push too fast and too hard than not at all. My prayer is that each governor from those generations that suffered through war will make absolutely certain that we remember those young men and those young women who risked and gave of their lives, so that we could enjoy the freedom that we have today.
The project in Duluth is designed not only as a memorial to the past and to those who served. It is also designed as a lesson, a reminder, to our young children. There were a
.lot of 17-year-olds and a lot of 18-year-olds who would have loved to have been home.
But, instead, they were asked to assault Okinawa and lwo Jima. They were asked to lose their lives and risk their lives at the Battle of the Bulge or to fly bombing missions over Berlin. And now they ask us, please remember those who gave so much of themselves for us. And I ask of you that we dedicate a monument to their courage, to their commitment, but also to our future.
Just as I call upon us to demonstrate compassion for those who have served so well, I am also calling on all Minnesotans to renew our commitment to the younger members of our society. Those of us who love this state -- and everyone here does --we know that we are a compassionate people. Few of us would ever turn our back on those in their time of need. Witness the tremendous outpouring of help during the floods last year. People from every corner of the upper Midwest volunteered to assist, volunteered to make someone's life better, and we identified with their tragedy.
That was a very visible crisis. Now there is mounting evidence that suggests that we are in the midst of another crisis, a silent one. Each year, thousands of babies are exposed to prenatal alcohol and, as a result, far too many of our children are subject to lifelong

disabilities, including mental retardation. Society -- we -- pay a rising price in costs for special education, out-of-home placements and corrections -- up to $1 million over the lifetime of a single victim. The tragedy is that it's all preventable. The bottom line is this: pregnant women cannot drink alcohol.
I particularly want to thank my wife, Susan, on behalf of this Administration and on behalf of the people of Minnesota, for her dedication, her leadership, and her genuine concern for our children. She has been not only a magnificent partner, but she truly loves those children. It is my prayer that when she and Judge Joan Lancaster submit their report tomorrow, that every single one of us will identify with their love and express our love in exactly the same way. They intend to present to us a comprehensive list of recommendations designed to combat this affliction. Our budget proposes $5 million in additional funding, so that they can press forward with education and prevention strategies. I very, very much want your support on this issue.
A compassionate people cannot tolerate our children starting out with one strike against them while in the womb. Nor, can we tolerate reports of children living in homeless shelters. The wonderful success story of our Minnesota economy has created thousands of jobs, record low unemployment and all of us feel a certain sense of security that was absent just a few years ago. Through our efforts to reform welfare, we, as a society, are now demanding that our brethren make every effort to work. The problem is that many of those first-time jobs may not pay much more than the minimum wage. As such, we have an obligation to ensure that there is sufficient affordable housing to meet the needs of every single one of our citizens.
In our supplemental budget, we have proposed $10 million to preserve apartments made more affordable through government assistance. Because federal assistance rates have not kept up with the marketplace, owners might well opt out of that program and therefore, the reliance on state help becomes greater and greater. Thousands of Minnesotans are now desperately seeking homes. In light of the severity of this problem, I am pledging to you today that we will increase our budget requests by an additional $5 million.
Serving the needs of troubled children and providing housing alternatives also forms the basis for our proposal to create the state's first residential academies, also called the boarding schools. We need to find a way to give children who have spent years bouncing around the foster care system a sense of permanency and a place to succeed. We also recognize that education is not a "one size fits all system". We know that people like former Minnesota Viking Joe Senser, who attended a residential academy, that without such a school, might well have landed in our criminal justice system.
I remember a few years ago talking to a young boy in one of our facilities in Minneapolis. He was a status offender. He was a runaway, a truant. He ran away because every time he went home, his father beat him within an inch of his life. And our system kept sending him back. We have to recognize that all parents are not equipped to be good parents. Our love, our commitment and our energies must focus entirely on the well-being of that child.
Now, we sit back as a body, and we complain about rising crime. We complain about the violence of adolescence, and we come in with strategies designed to lock them up for

longer and longer and longer. Until recently, we were on course to build a new prison every three years. But we began to recognize that if we could just focus more of our energies on preventing the problem, we could not only save an enormous amount of money, but we could save lives.
It is my hope that our entire system coming together -- judicial, executive and legislative -can focus entirely on the well-being of the child. Boarding schools become remarkable options to allow kids to escape from families that simply don't work -- families beset with violence, drugs, alcohol and crime; and allow them to go into a campus setting with a caring, dedicated, committed faculty and a community that truly wants them and say "We will work with you, and with our love, with our help, you will succeed." That is what it's all about.
The economic and human reality is that it costs us some $40,000 a year to keep a child at a juvenile detention center. That is more than an entire year's tuition at places like Harvard. We have to ask ourselves if it makes sense to spend money in that way, or does it make more sense to appropriate $12 million to build three residential academies so we can prevent some of these problems before they occur. It is my prayer that your answer will be a resounding "yes./I
We have in our audience some children from St. Joseph's Home in Minneapolis, whom I would like to now recognize. Today, we were led in prayer by Father Boxleitner of St. Joseph's. He and so many others, who work with children and who give their lives to the well-being of children, know full-well what this proposal means. It means a sense of permanency. It means an opportunity for success. Go back in your lives and every single one of you, at a point of stress, at a point of despair, had someone come to you, put a hand on your shoulder and say, "I'll help you."
That is precisely what we must do with our young people. In every single one of our endeavors, we must continue to focus on their well-being. I want them, all of our children, to grow up in an environment that focuses on opportunity over entitlement. To become part of a society that is healthy and is competitive, and that each of them is free to pursue their own individual happiness and to do it in such a way that it builds a sense of community.
We all, particularly those of us who are elected, recognize how fragile a democracy is. We recognize that our communities expect the very best from us. It has been my privilege to have served for the past eight years as governor of this state. It has been an even greater privilege to have had the opportunity to serve for some 30 years. And it has indeed been a tremendous honor to work with you on both sides of the aisle, building the kinds of coalitions and partnerships necessary to focus on our future.
When I opened my speech this afternoon, I talked about how well positioned we were to enter the next century. But in order for us to be well positioned, we had to develop policy, we had to engage in contentious debate and we had to seek alternatives. But at all times, we had the obligation to focus on the future. Our dream as an administration was "Don't focus on the moment. Don't cave into the immediate needs, but rather keep your eye on the long term./I Think of what it will be like to walk by the Capitol 20 years from now and

to be able to say, 'Well, I remember back in 1993 we started this. And in 1992, we did this. And in 1996, we did that. "' And the truth is, if we have done our job right, then we can look back with a tremendous amount of joy and say, "I'm honored and delighted to have served." To all of you, I can only say thank you. Thank you for your courtesies. Thank you for your kindness. I particularly want to thank the leadership. I know how much is expected of you. To those who have served in the past and those who serve today, I am told that some 70 percent of the members of this body were not here in 1991. Let me tell you, you did not miss much! But to Speaker Carruthers, to President Spear, Majority Leader Moe, Minority Leader Senator Day, Minority Leader Steve Sviggum, and to all of the leadership that has served in prior years, I thank you so much for engaging and procuring. I can honestly say I think the people of Minnesota are extraordinarily well-served. Every community has the obligation to give us its best and its brightest. And we can simply act on that expectation. And I sincerely pray that we always keep our eyes on the future. And the future is our children. My dream, my personal dream is that some day one of those young people, a young person in trouble, a young person who is helped with the hand on the shoulder, will be standing here as your Governor. Thank you very much!
