On January 29, 2002, as a Minnesota Senator, I attended President George W. Bush's first State of the Union address. It occurred just four months after the terrible events of September 11, 2001.
He began with these words. "As we gather tonight, our nation is at war, our economy is in recession and the civilized world faces unprecedented dangers. Yet the state of our union has never been stronger."
The President's words rang true. On the night of 9/11, I had joined with other Members of Congress on the steps of the United States Capitol, which had been spared destruction that day by the heroic actions of passengers aboard United Flight #93, led by Minnesota native Thomas Burnet, Jr.
We gathered, not as Republicans or Democrats, but as Americans. We wanted to show our nation and the world that, despite the day's horrors, our country stood strong, our leaders were united, and our government was working . . . together.
A few days later, we went together to the Pentagon and to Ground Zero.
Then I traveled with a small bi-partisan group of Senators to Afghanistan, just after American forces had routed the Taliban and al Qaeda and reopened the American Embassy, though still surrounded by razor wire and Marines.
So, when I heard the President's words, "The state of our union has never been stronger," I agreed that 9/11's disaster had united our country, our citizens, and our leaders.
I would like to say the same about the state of Minnesota today. After the most terrible economic disaster since the Great Depression; after its harsh lessons that we are all Minnesotans, whose lives, fates, and fortunes are intertwined; I wish I could say that we are all united, as we gather here this afternoon.
Whether we unite or whether we divide is hanging in the balance. The challenges we face threaten to divide us, rather than bring us together. Partisan posturing and narrow agendas threaten to overwhelm bi-partisan cooperation and compromise.
I do see promising signs of bi-partisan accord. I appreciate the constructive relationships I have established with Speaker Zellers, Majority Leader Koch, and their leadership teams; as well as with Minority Leaders Bakk and Thissen and their teams.
On the other hand, in just the second week of the legislative session, there was a hearing held on the effects of a shutdown of state government next July. A shutdown which would occur ONLY if we fail to resolve our differences before adjournment 103 days from now.

On the night of 9/11, I stood with my fellow United States Senators and Representatives on the steps of our Capitol to assure our fellow citizens that our government had not shut down, would not shut down, could not be shut down.
It is absolutely unthinkable that we would even contemplate doing so here in Minnesota. So, I ask you, legislators; I invite you; I implore you -- to join with me now, right here in our Capitol and pledge to the people of Minnesota that we will NOT shut down their government, our government -- not next July 1st, not any July 1st, not any day ever.
It should not happen; it need not happen - not as long as we are willing to work together and to compromise our individual views for the common good.
Compromise doesn't mean we have to agree, thank goodness, because we won't. It doesn't mean we can't debate, because we will. It means we can disagree, debate, and then reach a shared solution to our state's problems.
If we do so, by working together, we can rightfully tell the people of Minnesota that we succeeded. We did the very best we could, given the very difficult circumstances we inherited.
And if we all succeed together, the people of Minnesota will win. If we fail, the people of Minnesota will lose. It's that simple. It's that inescapable.
Our shared success is essential to turn our state around and get us - all of us - working again. By all of us working together.
For many years, Minnesota was known as the state that worked.
Governor Wendell Anderson, who is with us here today, is the only Minnesota Governor ever to ascend to the cover of Time Magazine for his leadership in creating "The Minnesota Miracle."
We were blessed with the largest number of Fortune 500 companies per capita of any state in the nation. Most of them were started here by Minnesotans, like my Great-Grandfather, and were built by business pioneers, like my Father, Bruce Dayton, who is here today, into successful national and international corporations.
They didn't succeed alone. Thousands of talented, well-educated, and productive Minnesotans worked hard together with them to achieve those tremendous successes.
Minnesota's economic ascendancy and social vitality were true public-private partnerships, and they occurred by the thousands throughout our state. In the fall of 1983, I traveled to Thief River Falls, as Commissioner of Economic Development, to award the first Enterprise Zone tax incentives, which Governor Rudy Perpich and the Minnesota Legislature had authorized that spring, to a seven-person business called Artco. Those business leaders and their hard-working employees built that small business into Arctic Cat, which employs well over a thousand people there.

It stands along side Digi-Key, another remarkable business success story, which its brilliant founder, Dr. Ronald Stordahl, started in his garage and which today employs some 2000 Minnesotans, who fulfill orders world-wide within 24 hours with 99.85% perfection.
Unfortunately, due to a combination of factors, Minnesota's economic success stalled during the past several years. During the last decade, Minnesota, which previously had been among the best states in the nation for economic growth and job creation, had one of the worst-performing economies.
According to a Wall Street Journal analysis, real median income in Minnesota fell by 9% from 1999 to 2008, over double the national decline of 4%. Only two other states had a worse decline. As a result, our per capita income fell from 7th highest among the states to 14th in 2009 .
Our employment growth averaged in the bottom ten among the fifty states during the past decade.
Last December, there were over 77,000 more Minnesotans unemployed than in December 2002, just before Governor Pawlenty took office. There were 5,881 fewer people working in Minnesota than there were eight years ago, even though our state's population grew during that time by over 286,000 people.
And it is worth noting that this decade of poor economic performance followed two consecutive cuts in the state income tax rates by Governor Ventura and that Minnesota Legislature in 1999 and 2000.
Fewer people paying lower taxes has meant state per-pupil aid for our students from kindergarten through 12th grade has been reduced by 14% in real, after-inflation dollars during the past 8 years. Tuition in our state's two-year public colleges has risen to the third highest in the nation; tuitions in our four-year universities are among the top ten highest.
Ten Minnesota school districts have gone to four-day school weeks, not for educational reasons, but rather for lack of money. Class sizes have grown, while thousands of talented teachers have been laid off. The average salary of those teachers who remain is 2% below the national average.
The number of road miles in poor and mediocre condition has more than doubled. Minnesota's rank among the 50 states in road condition has fallen from 8th to 27th.
Anyone who drives our state's deteriorating roads and highways, or is stuck in ever-longer metro traffic jams, or waits longer times for poorer bus service, wants a better Minnesota than this.
Any parent who has to find child care for their children because of four-day school weeks, while they're working five, wants a better Minnesota.
Any 5th grade teacher in a classroom with 36 students wants a better Minnesota.
Any college graduate, saddled with many thousands of dollars in student loans and unable to find a job, wants a better Minnesota. Anyone unable to find a job wants a better Minnesota.
Minnesotans want a better future. Minnesotans deserve a better future.

I can envision a better future.
I know what we must do to create that better future for all of us.
To progress, we have to invest. We have to invest in jobs; in education; in transportation; in the health of our people, communities, and environment; and in the transformation of government.
That is my Five-Point Plan for Future Prosperity. Invest in more jobs. Invest in better education. Invest in improved transportation. Invest in the health of our citizens, our communities, and our environment. Invest in the transformation of government services.
Investments require faith and trust. People invest in the future, only if they believe in that future. They invest, only if they trust their investing partners. They invest, only if they believe that others will do what is necessary for those investments to succeed.
To create together a successful Minnesota, we need to believe once again in each other and in our collective talents, abilities, and wisdom. We need to believe that our fellow Minnesotans are acting in good faith, doing their best, and that they, like us, want the best for their children, their communities, and our state.
So let us believe again in Minnesota. Let us believe again in one another. Let us invest together in our better future.
It begins with education.
I want to recognize and thank two of our most distinguished citizens, the retiring leaders of our two largest higher education institutions: the President of the University of Minnesota, Robert Bruininks, and the Chancellor of the Minnesota State College and university System, James McCormick.
President Bruininks has led the University of Minnesota with great distinction as its 15th President since 2002. He has served the University for 39 years, as professor, dean, executive vice president, provost, and president. Fortunately for all of us, he will continue his outstanding service to the University in a faculty position.
Chancellor McCormick began his service to Minnesota in 2001, as the leader of the MnSCU system of 32 higher education institutions statewide. He has given us a decade of strong, visionary guidance to bring those vitally important institutions together as one system. We thank him for his outstanding service to Minnesota. 
Three other very distinguished educators are with us today.
Dr. Efe Agbamu is Minnesota's Secondary Principal of the Year.
Dr. Agbamu is currently Principal at Park High School in Cottage Grove, where she instituted an International Baccalaureate program. She is recognized for her "ability to achieve academic and community goals, for improving teaching and learning and encouraging a positive school environment for staff and students." 
James Sonju, the Principal at Rochester's Lincoln K-8 Choice School, is Minnesota's Elementary School "Science and Mathematics Principal of the Year." He was selected for his work integrating cutting-edge science throughout the curriculum and revolutionizing the way his school teaches science. 
Ryan Vernosh is Minnesota's Teacher of the Year. He is a 6th grade teacher at Maxfield Magnet School in St. Paul, where he has taught since 2006. He says the two biggest issues facing education are the achievement gap and social justice. "These gaps are unacceptable and are my driving force as I prepare to teach every day." 
I salute these five great Minnesotans and all of our state's outstanding educators. They know, as I do, that better education is key to a better Minnesota. It is why I was so pleased to re-affirm last week my promise to increase state funding for public K-12 education every year I am Governor, with no excuses and no exceptions.
Our children's futures are in our hands. Their futures are our responsibility.
I ask the Legislature to follow my lead and increase state funding for K-12 education.
That doesn't mean more money to maintain the status quo. To the contrary, every additional dollar we spend on education should be directed toward improving the quality of that education.
Starting with the experiences we provide our state's children in the very first months and years of their lives.
I have been greatly impressed with the careful thought being devoted by many dedicated adults to the best use of our resources for early childhood education.
That is why I will re-establish the Governor's Council on Early Childhood Education and the Children's Cabinet, both to be led by Education Commissioner Brenda Cassellius.
This is a terrific opportunity for continued public-private partnerships, involving business leaders, foundation executives, parents, educators, and everyone else who cares about our children and their success.
Then we need to commit more state money to providing all parents with the option of affordable all-day kindergarten for their children. How can states like Alabama, Louisiana, and Mississippi fund all-day kindergarten, while we in Minnesota do not?
Despite our deficit, my budget will propose increased funding to expand the number of children who can receive all-day kindergarten. I ask the Legislature to help me find the additional money as soon as possible to make all-day kindergarten an option for every child in Minnesota.

In our shared desire to improve our elementary and secondary schools, our colleges, and our universities, I urge all of us to work together - instead of against one another.
For too long, teachers and other educators have been battered by continuing criticisms of their commitment, their ability, and their effectiveness. For too long, words like accountability, responsibility, and acceptable progress have been used to imply that there is none.
To say that is untrue does not mean we are satisfied with every aspect of our educational services today. It means that we are going to take a different approach to making them better.
We are going to listen to one another's concerns; we are going to work cooperatively and constructively; and we are going to enlist the best ideas from the real experts: the parents, teachers, principals, and superintendents, who are most in touch every day with our students and their needs.
As someone said, all the reform we could possibly use is available to us right now in those schools, colleges, and universities, which are educating students most successfully.
We need to identify those successes, share their strategies, and both encourage and require their use elsewhere.
I again ask every business in Minnesota to adopt a school, college, or university: to become actively involved in making them better. They will benefit from you, and you will learn from them.
Another crucial area of investment is in transportation. Minnesota suffers today from the failed legacy of twenty years of declining investments in our highways, roads, and bridges; in our public transit systems; and in other critical infrastructure. Our decline has been worse than most other states, which means we are falling further behind in what I consider one of the most important "business climate" measures: the quality and capacity of our transportation systems and other infrastructure.
It doesn't have to be that way. Look at our Metropolitan International Airport, where new investments have been made continuously during those same twenty years.
It's not perfect, but it's remarkable. Virtually an entire new airport has been constructed while continuing to operate the old one. It is rated one of the best-managed airports in the country and even the world.
Or consider the recently completed Highway 62 interchange, also built while remaining open for traffic. It's not perfect; yet it's a big improvement, and it provides for better public transit as well.
The notion we don't know how to invest in critical infrastructure improvements, or to implement those projects efficiently, is foolish. What's even more foolish, however, is our failure to make necessary investments in them. The results are deteriorating highways throughout Greater Minnesota and worsening congestion in our metro system.
Roads, highways, and public transit are to our state's economy, as are arteries to the human body.

If the arteries are healthy, and efficiently transport blood, oxygen, and nutrients throughout the body, everything works at its best. If, however, the arteries become decrepit or clogged, the body's performance suffers.
Minnesota is at a critical juncture with its transportation systems. Our investments are inadequate to maintain their condition or expand them to serve our growing population.
Their further deterioration will seriously constrict our future economic growth and damage our social vitality.
That is why I have asked Transportation Commissioner Tom Sorel to present to the Legislature his ideas for better roads, highways, and transit systems, and to begin the discussion of how best to finance them. I invite others with transportation and finance expertise in both the private and public sectors to join us in that discussion.
I ask the Legislature to consider creating a Transportation Finance Authority, chaired by the MnDOT Commissioner, to bring together the best minds and their ideas for financing the transportation improvements upon which our future social and economic vitality depend.
Third, we have to invest in the health, safety, and well-being of our citizens, our communities, and our environment.
Fortunately for all of us, there are so many Minnesotans who go to work every day to make our lives better.
I especially want to honor today the men and women who risk their lives to keep our lives safe.
Col. Eric Kerska is the Commander of the Minnesota National Guard's 1st Brigade Combat Team, 34th Infantry Division. The Red Bulls!
He will lead the 2,400 citizen soldiers of the 1st Brigade, when they deploy in May to support, for one year, Operation New Dawn, the drawdown phase of U.S. military operations in Iraq.
Col. Kerska has been a National Guardsman for over 21 years and a soldier for over 27 years. In his civilian career, he is a battalion chief for the Rochester Fire Department - a job he will put on hold while he serves his third tour of duty.
He is joined today by his wife, Tina, who is equally a Minnesota hero for her sacrifice in giving up her husband for the next year to protect our country. COLONEL ERIC and TINA KERSKA.
With us also is a family of Minnesota heroes: 1st Sergeant Gary Wenzel, his wife Cathy, and their 18 yearold son, Private First Class Todd Wenzel.
1st Sergeant Wenzel has been deployed twice. During his 18-month tour in Iraq in 2004-2005, Cathy Wenzel founded "Project Backpack," for military sons and daughters; and another organization, "Minnesota Veteran Family Support," providing families with services before, during, and after military deployment.

Today, the Wenzel's oldest son, Andrew, is on his way to Afghanistan; and Todd will be deploying with the 1st Brigade Combat Team later this spring.
PLEASE JOIN WITH ME IN PAYING TRIBUTE TO THIS EXCEPTIONAL MINNESOTA FAMILY: 1ST SERGEANT GARY, CATHY, AND PRIVATE TODD WENZEL.
Colonel Kerska and Private Wenzel, please extend to all of the 2400 men and women in your Red Bull unit our deepest gratitude for their heroic service to our state and nation, and our heartfelt prayers for all of your safe return.
Closer to home we are protected by the courageous women and men, who wear the uniforms of law enforcement officers throughout our state. We are honored today by the presence of the Police Officer of the Year, Adam Bailey.
Officer Bailey has been with the St. Paul Police for 6 years; previously he served with the St. Louis Park Police.
He was named the Minnesota Police and Peace Officers Association's Police Officer of the Year for his outstanding service.
Officer Bailey has also been awarded the City of St. Paul's highest honor - the Medal of Valor - for his extraordinary heroism in the line of duty. OFFICER ADAM BAILEY.
To Officer Bailey and all the Minnesotans in uniform, who risk their lives every day and night to keep all of us safe, please accept our deepest gratitude for your dedicated and heroic service.
In addition to protecting the safety of our citizens, we must do everything possible to protect their health and well-being. The best possible and most affordable health care for all of our citizens is far too important to become a political football in the 2012 Presidential Superbowl.
Minnesota has long been a national leader in health care innovation, and our citizens everywhere have benefitted enormously from that leadership.
When my Mother was hospitalized in New York City before her passing, I learned there is no private or public hospital there, at any price, which provides a quality of care that is routine throughout Minnesota. Nor can one find the quality of doctors, nurses, and other health care providers.
Those professionals, clinics, and hospitals are absolutely priceless. All Minnesotans need and deserve access to them at the most affordable prices. We can have our honest disagreements about how best to achieve that goal.
Let us promise, however, that our disagreements will be based upon honest differences over policies, not politics.

Fourth, we need transform how we provide our citizens with the best public services, most efficiently, at the lowest cost.
This is a clear but daunting challenge: How do we improve government services and performance while we also cut costs?
Minnesota is not alone. Republican and Democratic governors and legislators across the country are grappling with this crisis.
The best of them are realizing, as my son, Eric's, business school professor told him, a crisis is a terrible thing to waste, and they are getting down to business. That is what we need to do in Minnesota.
Improving government's efficiency and service quality while reducing its cost has bipartisan support -- and leadership in both the public and private sectors. I want to thank General Mills for their support of our state's Enterprise LEAN business process improvement initiative. This initiative has improved service and cut costs; it will be expanded.
We need to do more, and we will. I want to combine the best private sector expertise with our public sector experience, to make Minnesota government the best in the world.
Our Administration will lead the way. I have asked Lt. Governor Yvonne Prettner Solon and our Chief of Staff, Tina Smith, to head this effort, along with MMB Commissioner Jim Schowalter, Administration Commissioner Spencer Cronk, and Office of Enterprise Technology Commissioner Carolyn Parnell.
I have asked them to immediately identify cost savings. For example, Minnesota has already spent $168 million in this biennium on office technology, like computers and desktop printers. Local governments spent an additional $228 million. What if we pooled our purchasing power to get a better deal for Minnesota taxpayers?
We will examine every area of expenditure and contracting to find ways to cut costs, while improving services.
Longer term, we need transformational change to improve the productivity of government, and bring it fully into the 21st century. The opportunities are huge, and the savings can be enormous.
This reform will succeed best, if we work in partnership with our state employees.
The good ideas for improvements and efficiencies often come from the people who work in government every day. Treating them with the dignity and respect they deserve will be essential to our success.
Fifth, and most important, we need our business leaders to believe in Minnesota, to invest in our state, and to create more jobs for the thousands of our citizens, who want to work.
We also need better working partnerships between our state's businesses, colleges and universities, other civic organizations, and state and local governments.

We all agree upon the need to create more jobs. Putting more people to work throughout Minnesota is essential to our economic recovery, to our social well-being, to a better future for all of us.
I am pleased to report to our fellow citizens that the Legislature and I have found areas of cooperative agreement.
We agree that our state's permitting and approval processes for new and expanding businesses have been taking unreasonably long; and we are united in our determination to shorten them, while protecting our citizens and our environment.
Two weeks ago, I signed an Executive Order to begin that streamlining process immediately. DNR Commissioner Tom Landwehr and MPCA Commissioner Paul Aasen have been working with legislative leaders of both parties to put those and other improvements into legislation.
I thank Speaker Zellers, Majority Leader Koch, and the other legislators, who are working with us to achieve this progress. May it characterize our cooperative spirit throughout the rest of the session.
I hope that we can find that same cooperative spirit to pass the statewide bonding bill, which I proposed last week.
Those investments will help build a better Minnesota for generations to come. National economists, commenting on continuing high unemployment, say a crucial factor holding back job growth is that construction has not yet revived.
That is my Bonding Bill's initial purpose: to put up to 28,000 unemployed Minnesotans in the private-sector construction industry back to work.
And, through those long-term improvements, to benefit all Minnesotans for years to come.
I want businesses everywhere in Minnesota to feel wanted, valued, and appreciated by everyone in our Administration.
I have asked the heads of our Departments of Agriculture, Natural Resources, the IRRRB, and the Tourism Office to work closely with businesses in those important industries, which are so vital to our state's prosperity, especially in Greater Minnesota.
I want to thank Jason Thormodson, an 11 year-old future farmer and mechanic from Madelia, for reminding me yesterday how very important agriculture is to our state.
DEED Commissioner Mark Phillips will have overall responsibility for our business outreach; and I have asked him to revitalize the former Star Cities for Economic Development program, which I inherited, as DEED Commissioner, from the Administration of Governor Al Quie.
Governor Quie is here today, and I want to honor him for his outstanding service to our state as our Congressman, our Governor, and our leading citizen.
His Star Cities program trained local officials, Chambers of Commerce members, college and university presidents, and other civic leaders, to work in partnership and lead their cities' economic growth efforts.
Those local economic development teams need to be better supported by state officials, and I promise that their efforts will be given the highest priority by everyone in our Administration.
I will be personally available to assist them in any way I can. I thank Representative Fabian for asking me to join him and Senator Stumpf at North Star Agri Industries' recent groundbreaking in Hallock.
I appreciate Representative Hamilton and Senator Magnus inviting me to Jackson for AgCo's exciting expansion, which will bring over 100 new jobs to our state.
I stand ready to go anywhere in our state, nation, or world where there are jobs to be gained for Minnesota, and to assist the businesses who provide them.
And I am especially grateful to our Super-Volunteer, Senior Advisor Kathy Tunheim, and my good friend, Tom Borman, who will help me reach out to Minnesota's business leaders.
Some will criticize me for proposing next week to ask those successful businessmen and women and other wealthy Minnesotans to pay higher taxes.
I ask them for their forbearance during this fiscal crisis, which I did not create, but inherited, and now, with you in the Legislature, must solve.
I ask Minnesota's business leaders and other most successful citizens to give us two years to turn this Ship of State around. Not by savaging essential public services, upon which you and your employees also depend, but rather by transforming the ways in which government operates here in Minnesota.
And, with your help, to reduce the need for those services by putting people back to work throughout our state.
My Father's favorite quote was from The Bible. "To whomsoever much has been given, of him shall much be required."
You have achieved so much. I ask you, please, to help your state, your children and grandchildren, your friends and neighbors, to regain what you and I have enjoyed so much and benefitted from so greatly during our lives here in Minnesota. Please - help us restore Minnesota to greatness.
I invite you to contribute your expertise to help us regain that greatness - at the state level, and at the county, city, township, and school district levels.
Adopt a school. Volunteer in one of them. Teach a social service agency how to become more costefficient. Help the legislature and me to balance the state's budget more wisely. Contribute your ideas, your talents, and your wisdom. We need you now more than ever.
In closing, I ask all Minnesotans for the same forbearance. I ask not to be finally judged by the budget I am required to submit next week.

I ask you to remember that I was not given a blank slate on which to write my best proposals for our state's future. Neither was the Legislature. We were left a horrendous fiscal mess, a decade of economic decline, and state agencies poorly managed.
All of that must be turned around. All of it will be turned around, but not by tomorrow, and not entirely by the end of this legislative session.
WE WILL, however, TURN IT AROUND - and move Minnesota ahead once again - to reclaim our former greatness.
I approach this monumental assignment with the utmost dedication and determination. I know Lt. Governor Prettner Solon and our exceptional Cabinet do as well.
I believe our 201 Legislators feel that same awesome responsibility.
I urge them to approach their difficult decisions, as I do, with caution and care.
We will be properly judged by effects of our decisions and actions on the lives of our fellow Minnesotans - this year, next year, and for years to come. Whether we make their lives better or worse.
Together, we must shape a strategy that will create a better Minnesota, for all of us and for all who will follow us.
We must reverse Minnesota's past decline. And return our state to a path of growth, success, and prosperity.
We can; we must; and we will.
By all of us working together. . .
To get Minnesota working again.

Mr. Speaker and Members of the MN House of Representatives.
Madam President and Members of the MN Senate.
Madam Chief Justice and Distinguished Members of the MN Supreme Court.
My fellow Constitutional Officers. Members of my staff and Cabinet.
Vice President Mondale. Governor Anderson. Other Distinguished Guests. Family and friends. My fellow Minnesotans.
My father, Bruce Dayton, is 93 years old. Sundays, we have lunch together at his home in Long Lake, where I grew up.
62 years ago, my father bought 40 acres of mostly woods and a corn field for $6000. He and my mother built a house there, and we moved into it when I was five years old. Over the years, my father acquired 130 more acres. He was the first person in Minnesota to restore his fields to their original prairie grass and flowers; and he has now donated his property to the people of Minnesota, which the DNR will preserve as one of the few remaining “old-growth” forests in our state.
Last October, as we surveyed the beautiful fall colors on trees bordering his field of prairie grass, I said to him, “You know, Dad, you have been a very good steward of this land. It is in so much better condition than when you bought it.”
I often wonder how our children and grandchildren will judge our stewardship. Will they thank us for leaving our state, nation, and world in better condition than when we inherited it? Or will they ask, “How could you have left us with such a mess?”
The answer is for us to decide.
I am hopeful, because I believe in Minnesota. I believe in Minnesotans. And, fortunately, our state is now showing signs of a long-awaited and much-needed economic recovery. Even better, Minnesota has regained its accustomed position leading most other states’ economic growth, after lagging behind for much of the past decade.
Minnesota’s latest unemployment rate in December 2011 was 5.7%, which was a record 2.8% below the national average. While the national economy has regained less than half of the employment lost from the depth of the Great Recession, Minnesota has regained all of its lost employment. The number of employed Minnesotans today is at an all-time high. And Minnesota’s percentage increase in total wages during 2011 was almost 5 times greater than the rest of the country.
The 2012 State Business Tax Climate Index ranked Minnesota only 45th among the states. The top five were: Wyoming, South Dakota, Nevada, Alaska, and Florida. All, except for Alaska, are “Right-to-Work” states.
Last month, however, Minnesota’s unemployment rate was lower than 4 of those 5 states. During the past two years, our growth in average hourly earnings equaled the best and beat the rest. Our per-capita income was 2nd highest.
We’re doing something right.
Yet, even though 97,000 more Minnesotans are working today than at the depth of the Great Recession, there are still more than 168,000 Minnesotans, who want to work, but cannot find employment.
They must be our #1 priority. So, I say to legislators, let’s take your best ideas and my best ideas and turn them into jobs! And let’s do it now.
I have already sent you three major jobs initiatives. My proposed bonding bill would repair buildings and upgrade classroom equipment at our state colleges and universities. It would improve our state parks. It would help finance downtown revitalization projects in several cities.
Five outstanding Mayors are with us tonight: in alphabetical order, Mayor Eric Anderson of Mankato; Mayor Ardell Brede from Rochester; St. Paul Mayor Chris Coleman; Mayor Dave Kleis of St. Cloud; and Minneapolis Mayor RT Rybak.
My father and my uncles taught me the importance of continuously improving the downtowns of our major cities. They are the economic hearts of entire regions. If the heart weakens, the rest of the body suffers.
One-third of all Minneapolis property taxes are paid by downtown enterprises. That keeps property taxes lower for everyone else in the city.
Every year, the City of Rochester and Olmsted County send almost $90 million more to the State Treasury in taxes than they receive back in LGA, School Aid, and other assistance. Why wouldn’t we want to help make these and other key cities as successful as possible?
One national study estimates my bonding bill would create 21,700 jobs, most of them in the private sector.
If you’re skeptical, divide by two. That’s still more than 10,000 Minnesotans, now unemployed, who could be working all over the state.
Legislators, you are obviously entitled to your own preferred projects. I ask, however, that you develop your priorities quickly and pass a bonding bill this month.
The sooner you act, the sooner several thousand unemployed Minnesotans will be doing the work that those repairs and renovations require.
Pass the bonding bill, now. Please.
I have also proposed building a new “People’s Stadium” which would provide private sector jobs for several thousand more Minnesotans.
I’m amazed that some people feel no urgency to put several thousand more Minnesotans back to work.
The legislative authors, Senator Rosen and Representative Lanning, along with Chairman Ted Mondale, have been terrific partners in this undertaking. They may be getting close to a site, a deal, and a bill. Then it will be up to you in the legislature.
Some of you reportedly want to avoid voting on a stadium until after next fall’s elections. That would be terribly unfair to the several thousand unemployed Minnesotans, who could be working on that project this year, and to the Vikings.
Pass the Stadium Bill this session. Please.
My third jobs proposal is a “Jobs Now” tax credit to encourage businesses to hire unemployed Minnesotans, Veterans, and recent college graduates. It would reduce taxes for participating businesses, while putting still more of our citizens to work.
Last week, the Minnesota National Guard’s Adjutant General, Richard Nash, reported that of the over 3000 Minnesota Guardsmen and women presently serving in Kuwait, 22% of them will be unemployed, when they return home.
After they ALL served our country heroically, 22% of them won’t have jobs. That is shameful.
It is why, in addition to my “Jobs Now” tax credit, I have also proposed expanding the Minnesota GI Bill to provide education benefits to all eras of veterans, because unemployment among all Minnesota veterans may be as high as twice the state average.
Sitting upstairs, are two Minnesota veterans.
Mr. Steven Jackson served in the US Army for 15 years in places like Iraq.
Mr. Jack Marshall for served 6 years in the Air Force, and did a tour in Kuwait.
These two heroes served our state and nation with great patriotism, valor, and honor. Now they can’t find jobs. That is wrong.
So pass a “Jobs Now” bill and expand the MN GI Bill. Please.
One area in which the Legislature and my Administration have worked well together is government reform. I look forward to continuing our bi-partisan collaboration in streamline permitting processes even further, reducing the costs of public services, and making them more cost-effective.
We have already made real progress. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and the Department of Natural Resources now complete 99% of their priority permit reviews within 150 days. We can make it still faster, and we will.
It is already paying off, however. Recently, an energy consultant asked the MN Pollution Control Agency about air permitting for a potential new business.
MPCA staff walked him through the general timelines and process. Staff also offered to meet with the company in advance to help improve the proposal and provided a pre- application checklist. This consultant said he helps businesses in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois, South Carolina and California; he had never heard of another state providing this kind of service. And our 150 day turnaround seemed shorter than other states.
I also received a note from a businessman whom I met at the MN Chamber dinner. His wood products company employs 140 people in Northern Minnesota. Last year his company invested about $4 million to improve its Minnesota facility, with the possibility of another $5 million in this year. He said, “None of this would have been possible without the cooperation of Commissioner Aasen and his department.”
DEED Commissioner Phillips’ “Business First-Stop” is another step in the right direction. It is a one-stop shop, where new and expanding businesses can make one call and get whatever help they need.
Under the expert tutelage of companies like General Mills, state agencies are implementing “LEAN” practices of continuous improvement, which are saving taxpayers’ money and improving services. Commissioner Cronk and his Department of Administration saved $3 million in six months by revamping contracts with suppliers. The Department of Revenue, under Commissioner Frans’ leadership, saved $1 million by implementing electronic check processing, and greatly reduced the turn-around time for tax refunds.
At the Department of Agriculture, Commissioner Frederickson and Supervisor Harley Olinske saved taxpayers $300,000 a year, while also shortening the time for most grain and produce license renewals to less than 30 days. Mr. Olinske epitomizes the dedicated state employees, who work hard every day, and get little credit. He deserves some tonight.
Finally, Commissioner Parnell and her team are working hard to implement the legislature’s decision last year to consolidate the state’s many IT functions. Anything that gets Representatives Kahn and Downey hugging on the House floor deserves a lasting legacy, and this will have one.
The key to our future, as we all know, is education. As President Obama says, “We can’t out-compete other countries, if we don’t out-educate them.” That means we must develop the best educational systems in the world.
Despite our other difficulties last session, we agreed upon many significant education innovations. We enacted an Alternative Licensure path for teachers.
We expanded Early Childhood Education, and our doing so was crucial to Minnesota’s winning the federal “Race to the Top” competition against 34 other states.
We established evaluation requirements for both teachers and principals. We increased the per-pupil aid formula by $50 per student in each year of this biennium, the first real increase since 2003.
We enacted “Read by Third Grade,” which will be a priceless gift to the children of Minnesota, and their parents, from a wonderful legislative leader. In fact, two outstanding leaders of improving the quality of education in Minnesota are retiring after this year: Senator Gen Olson and Representative Mindy Greiling. Let’s pay tribute to them now.
We accomplished a great deal last year, by working together. The US Department of Education’s approval of our No Child Left Behind wavier, along with our afore-mentioned Race to the Top success, is testimony to their confidence in the positive direction of Minnesota’s education innovation. That tremendous progress is a tribute to the excellent leadership of Commissioner Cassellius and legislators of both parties.
Our challenge this year is to put all of it to work for the schoolchildren, parents, teachers, and administrators throughout Minnesota. Already, however, some legislators are advancing even more new proposals.
I have a novel idea. Let’s develop any education initiatives this year in cooperation with teachers, rather than in conflict with them. The best education for all Minnesota students should not be a political ploy; and I will not support anything, which is.
We face similar challenges to improve our colleges and universities throughout Minnesota.
Unfortunately, unlike K-12 education, where we increased funding last session, the University of Minnesota and MnSCU were each cut by almost 15%.
The two new heads of these invaluable institutions are here tonight. Dr. Eric Kaler is the 16th President of the University of Minnesota.
Dr. Steven Rosenstone is the 4th Chancellor of the Minnesota State Colleges and Universities system.
They are joined tonight by the new Director of the Office of Higher Education, former Senator Larry Pogemiller.The three of them, together with legislators and other higher education leaders, have the enormous responsibility to retool Minnesota’s colleges and universities and give their students the crucial advantages needed to succeed in this highly competitive global economy.
We’re told that by 2018, 70% of Minnesota’s jobs will require some kind of postsecondary degree.
That’s just the beginning, however; not the end. Our postsecondary students need more than degrees; they need the world’s best educations -- so they can thrive in that world. And Minnesota will not thrive, unless they do.
Chancellor Rosenstone and President Kaler need our support to make all of their campuses excellent. Their curricula and classrooms must be world-class and state-of-the-art.
They must prepare their students for the jobs of the future, not the past.
It’s already happening in many classrooms on U of M and MnSCU campuses. Mr. Ron Ulseth is an instructor at Itasca Community College. He developed the program “Iron Range Engineering,” a hands-on learning experience, where students do real engineering work for Minnesota companies.
It’s so successful that the Engineering Department at Stanford University invited him there to teach their faculty about the benefits of this new model. When “Iron Range Engineering” meets Silicon Valley -- well, Ron, I just hope you have a share of the royalties!
Antoinette McCarthy is another wonderful success story. She said, “I had tried college before, but I wasn’t as successful as I had hoped.” As a result, she struggled to find a decent-paying job and a career with a future.
Now, Antoinette is poised for success. She just completed a FastTRAC program at Inver Hills Community College, receiving her Certificate as a Nursing Assistant.
Her hard work for that certificate means she will earn, on average, nearly double what someone would at a minimum-wage medical job.
We need FastTRAC on every campus in Minnesota. We need state and federal job training and workforce development monies to be better coordinated with higher education funding and programs, so that all of our students come out of our educational systems, skilled and ready to succeed. The success of our state depends upon it.
Another prerequisite for our children and grandchildren’s future success is for us to restore fiscal responsibility to Minnesota government.
Last year, legislators, who voted for the final budget bills, and I increased borrowing from our schools by $750 million and borrowing from our future by another $750 million. $1.5 billion in additional debt should put our so-called $876 million surplus in perspective.
If my final tax proposal, to raise income taxes on only the wealthiest 2% of Minnesotans had been accepted, not only would this biennium’s budget have been balanced and that $1.5 billion of additional borrowing unnecessary; but also the current budget forecast for the next biennium would show a surplus, rather than a $1.3 billion deficit.
In fairness, I acknowledge that many of you in the legislature wanted to balance the budget by reducing spending.
Next November, Minnesotans will decide which of our approaches they prefer. Until then, let us resolve that we will conduct this session’s financial affairs responsibly.
No more borrowing.
As stewards of the public trust, I ask us to leave one final legacy to future generations of Minnesotans. Our wonderful State Capitol building is wearing down and falling apart. We can either wait until someone is seriously injured or worse, when the public outcry will compel action; or we can act now.
I am asking you Legislators to make the most unselfish vote of your careers: to kick yourselves, me, and everyone else out of the Capitol, as needed, for the four years necessary to renovate this building, and to make it both functional and safe for the next 100 years. It will be hard on all of us – but so much better for those who follow us. That is the essence of selfless stewardship. And it epitomizes the kind of legacy for which our children and grandchildren will be grateful.
When this magnificent Capitol opened in 1905, Minnesota was a very different state. And not nearly as successful.
Our citizens’ per-capita income was below the rest of the country’s, and it dropped to only 85% of the national average by 1920. There it floundered for the next 25 years, before beginning a gradual climb to parity with the rest of the country in the 1960’s, rising above the national average in the 1970’s, and continuing to improve thereafter.
So how did Minnesota become above average? The President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis recently noted, as have others, that the number of educated people in our state’s labor force is higher than in the nation; therefore their productivity and their work quality are better.
MinnPost’s Louis Johnston attributes our success to high rates of labor force participation, especially by women; our greater investments in human capital, such as education and health care; and both public sector and private sector investments in physical capital.
As we strive to improve our state for ourselves and for our descendants, let us not forget what has lifted us from below average to above average to outstanding. Let’s not destroy good wages and benefits; damage our schools, colleges and universities; or curtail our capital investments, in search of another strategy of unproven value.
Or one of proven less value.
Minnesota is a remarkable state. Our people, our businesses, our non-profits, and our governments have worked well together to achieve a standard of living and quality of life, which surpass most. Both DFL and Republican governors and legislators have contributed to that success.
Let us, please, build upon what has been done before us, not tear it down. Minnesotans want more efficient government; they want better services. And they want us to cooperate and compromise in order to deliver them.
I stand ready to work with legislators on both sides of the aisle to enact laws that will better Minnesota.
They will be the bills, which have involved members of my administration and legislators from both parties in their development.
Those bills I will support.
I am not interested in highly partisan, extreme measures, which are intended for campaign literature, rather than law.
Those bills I will not support.
President John F. Kennedy, in his book, Profiles in Courage, wrote:
“It is compromise that prevents each set of reformers from crushing the group on the other end of the political spectrum. The fanatics and extremists are always disappointed at the failure of their government to rush to implement all of their principles and to denounce those of their opponents. But the legislator knows that there are few, if any, issues where all the truth and all the right and all the angels are on one side.”
If we cooperate, if we share our best ideas, if we exchange our rigid ideologies for our shared ideals, we will revitalize our state. And we will be doing the jobs the people of Minnesota sent us here to do.
Only by working together can we achieve a lasting legacy, in which we – and they – can take pride.
May God Bless the State of Minnesota and the United States of America.In a State of the State Address, as in life, it's important to assess where we are, remember how we got here, decide where we want to go, and then determine how best to get there.
Comparing the state of our state today with conditions, when I took office two years ago, we have made important progress. We have much more work still ahead of us; however, we are on the way to a better Minnesota.
According to our Department of Employment and Economic Development, there are over 72,000 more jobs available in Minnesota today than when I took office two years ago. Almost 52,000 of those jobs were added in the past year.
Minnesota's job growth in 2012 was the 12th best among all 50 states; and we outperformed three of our four neighbors. Iowa ranked 30th best; South Dakota was 44th.
Wisconsin, which by the way is open for business, helped bring up the rear at 42nd. And, help spread the word across the St. Croix, their unemployment rate last month was 20% higher than ours, while our per capita income was 12% higher than theirs.
Only North Dakota, in the Upper Midwest, topped us in job growth last year, and their percent increase led the nation.
Our exports of agricultural commodities increased by 13 percent in 2012, compared with 2011. Total exports of all Minnesota goods and services have achieved eight straight quarters of record growth.
Our students' educational attainments have improved. Math scores for all tested grades, improved by 5.3 percent from 2011 to 2012, and reading scores improved overall by 1.3 percent.
We have, and continue to, lead the nation in important measures of health, including the lowest heart disease death rate, and the lowest percentage of obese or overweight children. We have the second longest life expectancy for all our citizens, and we're #1 for males.
I'll let Health Commissioner Ehlinger explain that discrepancy, and I expect that Representative Kahn will soon have a bill to correct it.
Last year, we eliminated premiums and expanded health care access for 16,000 more Minnesota children; and we were recognized for providing the Best Long Term Care Services in the nation by the AARP Commonwealth Fund.

No one should be satisfied, or complacent. However, these and many other improvements are encouraging.
We have also made great progress in restoring fiscal responsibility and operational integrity to Minnesota government, which also tells us a lot about what got us to where we are today.
I became Governor after a decade of deficits in both our federal and state governments. They squandered their positions of financial stability amidst consistent economic growth, which they enjoyed at the beginning of the 21st century, and which were then projected to continue for at least the next decade.
Few politicians can resist the opportunity to cut taxes. President Bush proposed two large tax cuts in 2001 and 2003, which I opposed as a Senator and Congress passed. In Minnesota, Governor Ventura convinced the legislature to reduce income tax rates in both 1999 and 2000. Both leaders assumed that the strong economic growth during the last half of the 1990's would continue. Unfortunately, both were wrong.
Also wrong were the politicians and economists, who promised that cutting taxes would lead to more economic growth, jobs, and revenues. Instead, the two federal tax cuts were soon followed by two recessions, the second the most severe since the Great Depression.
In the decade after Minnesota's income tax reductions, our economy fared worse than the nation and most other states. And at both the federal and state levels, big tax cuts followed by serious recessions produced large budget deficits, which threaten our current fiscal strength and future economic prosperity.
The solutions to those deficits were very clear. However, they were also very painful; so they were postponed, then postponed again, and again. Unfortunately, avoiding financial problems usually makes them worse. Fixing them then becomes even harder.
Thus, when I became Governor in January 2011, the State Budget Forecast projected a $6 billion deficit for the next two fiscal years. It took six months of difficult negotiations with the Republican-controlled legislature to finally agree upon a balanced budget.
Those decisions were hard for all of us and far more painful for all the Minnesotans denied needed services and assistance. But we had to enact a balanced budget, and we did.
Since then, an improving state economy and savings from health care reforms have boosted our finances by $2.5 billion for this biennium, enabling us to restore our reserves and repay over 60 percent of the previous school shifts.
We have repaired much of the fiscal damage we inherited, but we're not done yet. We face another deficit, projected at $1.1 billion, for the next biennium; and we still owe our schools another $1.1 billion.

My budget for the next biennium would lift us out of this miserable deficit-to-deficit cycle. It would eliminate the $1.1 billion deficit, balance the biennial budget, and begin the following biennium with a projected surplus that would enable us to pay back the remainder of the school shift.
My proposals have already aroused considerable controversy. Such debate is healthy in our democracy.
The genius of our system of governance is that no one gets to have it all her or his way. Starting with the governor.
Some will characterize any legislative changes in my budget as my loss. I don't see it that way, at all. The winners I care about are the people of Minnesota, whose collective best interests I was elected to represent. As were you in the legislature. Whatever outcome does the most to improve the lives of the most Minnesotans, makes winners of us all.
However, before we refocus on that controversy, I think we should look farther ahead. Former Governor Arne Carlson liked to say, "If you don't know where you're going, any road will take you there." I appreciate that wisdom more every year.
Where do we want to go? Where do we want Minnesota to be in a year, in a decade, or more? We will not agree on every aspect. However, if we can discover our shared goals, perhaps we will find greater accord on how best to achieve them. We can also better assess whether the path we're now on will lead us to them.
This perspective also broadens the time horizon of our decision-making. We must consider not only what is right for Minnesota today, but also what is best for Minnesota in the future.
So, what do I believe offers the best hope for a better future to most Minnesotans? I want Minnesota to provide the best jobs for our citizens, the best lives for their families, and the best environment for our businesses to provide those jobs.
Those who measure "business climate" only by tax rankings will question my strategy, although many surveys rate Minnesota lower in overall taxes than most are led to believe. We're 15th among the states in taxes, according to the Minnesota Center for Fiscal Excellence. And we rank 11th highest in per capita income.
However, Minnesota has not been considered a "low tax" state during my almost four decades of public service. And the facts show that states offering businesses and their top executives the lowest taxes usually offer the rest of their citizens the lowest incomes, the fewest public services, and the highest crime rates.
Furthermore, their job growth typically lags "high value and high performance" states like Minnesota.

So, yes, I absolutely meant what I said. I want Minnesota to provide the best jobs for our citizens, the best lives for their families, and the best support for our businesses to provide those jobs. I want Minnesota state government to provide the best value for everyone's hard-earned tax dollars and the most efficient, effective services anywhere.
I want Minnesota to offer the world's best educations for ALL of our citizens, children and grandchildren. Educations which begin early in life, and continue throughout life; so that all of us can learn the skills, and relearn the new skills, necessary to succeed in a rapidly changing and ever-more-competitive global economy.
We know that our exceptional citizens, who are more inventive, harder working, and more productive than people anywhere, have been the most important contributors to our state's economic progress and social vitality. Most of us agree that our citizens' superior educations have been crucial to our previous successes.
And many of us agree that providing all Minnesotans with the best, most advanced, and yet affordable educational opportunities will be even more essential to their future success, and thus to ours.
I will return shortly to consider whether we are on a path toward that goal.
I want all of us, and especially Minnesota's future generations, to live in a healthy environment; in safe, inclusive communities; and with the same rights and protections as every other American citizen.
A healthy life starts with, and depends upon, clean air to breathe, clean water to drink, protected natural environments to enjoy, and a secure ecological future. No one can endure the severe droughts or floods of recent years; endure (or, some, enjoy) our milder, snow-scarce winters; lather on sunscreen to walk outdoors without being greatly alarmed.

If you're not, talk with my good friend and world-premier polar explorer, Will Steger, who is here tonight, about the drastic climate changes he has witnessed.
Even more alarming is that our state and our nation are still not doing enough to reverse this path toward global catastrophe, before it is too late.

In Minnesota, we have made real progress in areas like energy conservation, more efficient farming and manufacturing practices, and the development and use of clean, renewable energy, especially wind energy, instead of polluting fossil fuels.
The question is: are we progressing fast enough? Are we doing all we can to utilize other renewables, such as solar, and also to make Minnesota the best place to locate these new industries and their jobs?
Many of you, who served in previous legislatures, deserve great credit for your pioneering work to expand our use of clean energy, including Lieutenant Governor Yvonne Prettner Solon and former Senator Ellen Anderson, who is also here tonight.
I challenge this legislature to work again with our state's visionary clean energy advocates, large energy providers, large energy users, other stakeholders, and my administration to use your past achievements as springboards for Minnesota's next big leap toward a sustainable energy future.
Safe, inclusive communities benefit all Minnesotans. Doing everything possible to stop the terrible acts of violence, which end young lives and victimize innocent people, should be an urgent priority for all of us.
Those strategies deserve and require more time than I have available tonight. Let me focus on one initiative, however, and enlist everyone's support.
Studies show that the highest incidences of juvenile delinquency and teenage pregnancy occur during the weekday hours after school. Years ago, there were more organized, supervised afterschool programs for young people. The ones remaining do exceptional work; but there are not enough of them, and they struggle to find the funding to continue.
Two years ago, I challenged businesses to "Adopt a School." Some businesses, to their great credit, were already involved in improving our schools, and others accepted my challenge.
Some, however, especially smaller businesses have told me it was just too big an assignment to adopt an entire school.
So, I invite you to "Adopt an After-School Program." It might involve a financial contribution, the donation of new or used equipment, or your employees as part-time volunteers. There are so many from which to choose, and so many young people who need better options than unoccupied time, streets, and gangs.
In the coming weeks, we will be releasing more information on how you can help. In the meantime, if you need help finding a worthy program, give me a call. I believe most of you have my home phone number by now. If not, it's 651-201-3468.
For the next two weeks, however, I'm taking calls at home only from "Adopt an After-School Program" volunteers. On anything else, please call my office, at 651-201-3499.

Let me mention one other cause, which is controversial, but consistent with my faith and my principles. And, more importantly, consistent with this country's founding principles and its Constitution. I believe that every Minnesotan should have the freedom to marry legally the person she or he loves, whether of the same or other sex.
Last year, Minnesotans began a conversation about why marriage matters, and we found our common belief that it is about love, commitment, and responsibility. I want Minnesota to be a state, which affirms that freedom for one means freedom for everyone, and where no one is told it is illegal to marry the person you love.

I realize now that I could fill the rest of the evening, and most of tomorrow morning, with my goals for "A Better Minnesota." I doubt that anyone wants to sit here for that long, and we're not set up to serve breakfast!
Many of my goals, however, are contained in my budget for the next biennium, along with new and continuing strategies to help us attain them. My budget addresses two over-riding imperatives: First, to erase a $1.1 billion deficit and balance the rest of it, while continuing to

improve the efficiency and quality of state services; and Second, to make the investments necessary to move Minnesota ahead.
How does it meet the first requirement? The old-fashioned way: by decreasing spending, enacting cost-saving reforms and raising revenues. My budget is balanced, fair and honest-- there are no gimmicks, no games.
I reduce projected state spending, while increasing investments in more jobs and better education. I continue our significant progress in improving the quality and the efficiency of state services.
And I raise revenues responsibly for the first time in many years, while also making our tax structure fairer for hard-working, middle-income Minnesotans.
My budget would reduce overall state spending for the next biennium by $1.8 billion below what was projected, when I took office in 2011. Back then, the State Budget Forecast predicted that laws enacted by the previous governor and legislature would result in expenditures of almost $39.7 billion during Fiscal Years 2014 and 2015. My current budget proposes spending $37.9 billion in that biennium, $1.8 billion less than originally forecasted.
That's worth repeating. My proposed budget for the next biennium would spend $1.8 billion less than was forecasted for those two years, when I took office.
Those who criticize my supposed lack of spending reductions evidently do not understand that many of the $2 billion cuts we made two years ago for the current biennium were permanent; and lowered spending by $2.5 billion in the next biennium, before I made my new proposals.
Take state funding for higher education, for example, which comprises the University of Minnesota, the MnSCU system, and student financial aid. Facing an overall $6 billion deficit, the 2011 legislature and I had to cut state support for higher education by 12 percent, to 2 billion, 568 million dollars.
Last November's Budget Forecast assumed the next biennium's expenditures for higher education would be the same as in the current biennium. Take a look. There are no spending increases for higher education; so, the previous 12 percent cut would continue into the next one.
However, that significant cut is only the latest reduction in state support for higher education. Last weekend, I searched the Department of Management & Budget's computerized archives, looking for a previous biennium, when the State of Minnesota spent less money, in real dollars, to support higher education.
I couldn't find one in records, which go back to the 1996/1997 biennium. I did learn that in real dollars, our state spends $569 million less on higher education in the current biennium, than we did 16 years ago.

I asked the MMB staff to look back even further, into the paper records. They found that the last time we actually spent less to support higher education, in real dollars, than we are in FY12-13 ... was in FY80-81.
I'll say it again. In every biennium since FY80-81, real state spending for all of postsecondary education has been higher than it is today.
My budget would add $240 million in higher ed. funding for the next biennium. That counts as spending increase, which, technically, it is. However, it falls over $100 million short of restoring the funding cut from FY10/11; and it still leaves state support for higher education hundreds of million dollars below the real levels 20 and even 30 years ago.
No wonder the most recent comparison of the 50 states by their expenditures for higher education per $1000 of personal income ranked Minnesota only 32nd. And no wonder tuitions keep rising, making a Minnesota college education less and less affordable for students and their families.
How much lower will we reduce our spending for postsecondary education, either in real dollars or compared to other states? Experts everywhere say that the quality and affordability of higher education is key to our future economic success. Does anyone believe that continuing to reduce our commitment to higher education is the path to a Better Minnesota?
Analyzing other areas of state government spending yields similar results. During the past decade, our state leaders reduced expenditures for many public services, both in real dollars and in comparison to other states. The latest survey places Minnesota 33rd among the states in total expenditures for K-12 education per $1000 of personal income; 37th for health and hospitals; 19th for police protection; and 48th for fighting fires.
Are we better off today after all those reductions in public services? I say, "No." Trying to cut our way to a Better Minnesota is a failed experiment.
That is why my budget takes a balanced approach. Real spending cuts are partly offset by responsible increases, mostly for better education from early childhood through post-secondary and for job creation incentives. Both are critical to assuring future economic opportunities and enhancing our quality of life.
Overall spending reductions and selective increases are one part of my balanced approach to eliminating the deficit, balancing the budget, and moving Minnesota ahead. Another important strategy is to expand the significant reforms, which my administration has made during its first two years in reducing the costs of services and improving their efficiencies.
We have instituted more reforms and achieved greater progress during our first two years than in all of the previous eight years. I will briefly mention just a few.
Today, Minnesota has retaken its rightful place as a national leader in health care reform. The cost of providing health care for increasing numbers of our citizens has, for years, been the most rapidly growing part of our state budget, as is true for virtually every other state. Curbing those cost increases, while expanding quality and affordable health care to all of our citizens, is crucial.
Our Department of Human Services contracts with managed care providers and insurance companies for most of its health care services. Thus our first target for reform was the way the state had previously contracted for those services; and we have already achieved significant cost savings.
Commissioner Lucinda Jesson's tremendous success in negotiating a 1 percent profit cap on existing contracts and putting the largest new contracts out for competitive bids, have saved state and federal taxpayers over $1 billion.
Our reforms do not stop there. My new budget proposes a comprehensive redesign of the fastest growing part of our HHS budget, our long term care system. By providing more choices to keep seniors and people with disabilities in their homes, with better care, we save $151 million in the short term. More importantly, we will have built a system that is financially sustainable when the age wave descends upon Minnesota starting in 2020.
Last week, we announced yet another reform measure that will change how the state pays for public health insurance, providing better care for 100,000 Minnesotans, and saving taxpayers an estimated $90 million.
Finally, Minnesota is one of the leading states in implementing this country's sweeping and farreaching reform of providing and paying for health care.
Over the next two years, our public programs will provide health care to an additional 145,000 poor Minnesotans who do not have insurance today. These are people who otherwise access care through costly emergency room visits, harming their health and driving up the price of health care for all of us.
And through the creation of a Minnesota Insurance Exchange, we will enable individuals, families, and businesses to make more informed decisions about good, affordable health care coverage.
In education, we have worked with DFL and Republican legislators, business executives, and other civic leaders to establish state support for early childhood learning programs, a quality rating system, and scholarships for low-income children.
My new budget would expand significantly early learning opportunities for children statewide. My proposal to provide state funds for optional all-day kindergarten would provide a continuum of learning from early childhood into first grade and beyond.
Two years ago, we worked with the legislature to make administrative and legislative reforms that streamlined businesses' permit application processes. We shortened the time taken by the Pollution Control Agency, to review permit applications to a maximum of 150 days, for all but the largest projects. We are now progressing toward the next goal of reducing those timelines to 90 days.
We're not done reforming. In fact, we're just getting started. Back in 1998, when I first ran for Governor, a campaign that most people have forgotten and I would like to, there was a television commercial for the soft-drink Seven-Up. Contrasting itself to Coke and Pepsi, it proudly called itself the "un-cola."
In my campaign, I proposed making an even-year legislative session "The Unsession." Except for responding to a fiscal or other emergency and passing a bonding bill, the session would be devoted to eliminating unnecessary or redundant laws, rules, and regulations; reducing the verbiage in those that remain; shortening the timelines for developing and implementing them; and undoing anything else, which makes government nearly impossible to understand, operate, or support.
I suggest making next year's legislative session the first "Unsession." After this session is concluded ... on time, in May ... I will ask my agency heads and legislative staff to begin making lists, checking them twice, and working with any legislators, other public officials, and citizens, who wish to spearhead these reforms.
The third component of my balanced budget approach raises state revenues, which will be necessary to eliminate the deficit and still prevent further reductions in the services and assistance that many Minnesotans need.
Raising revenues requires asking someone to pay more taxes. Making taxes fairer requires asking more of those citizens and corporations, who now pay less than their proportionate share.
Few people like paying taxes, even when they're fair. No one likes paying more taxes, even when necessary to make them fair.
But when taxes are unfair ... and remain unfair, not only do the people who are forced to pay more, rightfully resent it; but they also lose faith in their elected officials, who won't change it. Today, more and more hard-working, middle-class Minnesotans believe that the state's tax structure is unfair to them.

And they're right. The facts compiled by the nonpartisan staff at the Minnesota Department of Revenue show that the richest Minnesotans pay less of their incomes in state and local taxes than most other Minnesotans. Large multi-national corporations headquartered here admit their effective tax rates are well below the 9.8% paid by many smaller businesses.
Thanks to the excellent work of Minnesota 2020, I recently became aware of a new study, by the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, which confirms the Department of Revenue's analysis. It found that middle-class Minnesotans pay 26 percent more state and local taxes per dollar of income than do the top one percent of our state's income earners.
When people who have the most pay the least, this state and nation are in trouble. When lobbyists protect tax favors for special interests at the cost of everyone else's best interests, this state and nation are in trouble. My goal is to get us out of trouble.
As I see it, we have three basic budget options.
Plan A is the one I have proposed, or something close to it.
Plan B is to stick with our current tax structure, or something close to it.
Plan C is something better. No one would be happier than me to see a good Plan C. I'm still looking and I'm sure listening. But without one, our choices are between Plans A and B.
Let me briefly address some of my concerns with Plan B, sticking with the status quo. Most of us want stability and certainty in our lives. When confronted with the need for change and its resulting uncertainties, it's human nature to hunker down, hang on, and hope that the established order will return.
Today's reality, however, is that the old order doesn't show any signs coming back. Our state and our nation are engulfed by the new, global economy. We either act now to move ahead, or let ourselves fall behind.
Retaining the current tax structure doesn't even solve our current budget problems; much less advance our state to a better future. It still leaves a $1.1 billion deficit, which I insist must be resolved through honest, responsible measures. It leaves important services severely cut. And it leaves us unable to make the new investments, especially in jobs, economic growth, and education that I believe are essential to a Better Minnesota.
I have a respectful, but strong, disagreement with some of the other elected officials here tonight, about the value of public investments in, and incentives for, economic growth. My father and uncles taught me the paramount importance of continuous private and public investments in improving the communities in which people work and live. In my job, I apply that principle to the "community" of Minnesota.
For two years, my proposals to make capital investments in the downtowns of major cities, like St. Paul, Duluth, Rochester, Mankato, and St. Cloud, and investments in smaller, but equally essential projects throughout Minnesota were rejected by Republican legislative leaders.
Despite a lagging construction industry and good Minnesotans in the building trades unable to find work, they just said No.
Well, just saying No just won't work ... not in Rochester, where the renowned Mayo Clinic wants us to help them continue to outclass their competitors in other states and other countries ... and to continue doing so from Rochester. I thank Mayo, whose CEO Dr. John Noseworthy is with us tonight as a guest of Speaker Thissen, for giving Minnesota this chance to partner with them and help assure their world medical pre-eminence for decades to come ... in Rochester, Minnesota.
Our vitally important agriculture economy is crucial to our state's future. We cannot afford NOT to keep making new investments to support innovation, new production efficiencies, and even greater prosperity. That is why state funding for the Agricultural Growth, Research, and Innovation Program must remain a high priority
I have shared with University of Minnesota President Eric Kaler, who is here this evening, my high priority to return the University's Medical School to the national prominence it has previously achieved; and he has told me that he shares that goal. That turnaround, however, will require public investments.
I have talked with MnSCU Chancellor Rosenstone about the critical importance of his campuses retooling their programs to prepare their students for the jobs of the future. I know that the Chancellor is addressing this imperative. However, revising curricula, modernizing equipment, and upgrading technology all will require public investments.
And I have not even mentioned tonight ... nor does my budget address ... the critical need to invest in improving our highways, roads, and bridges statewide; our public transit systems; our ageing infrastructure; and the list goes on.
We can choose, as others in our positions have before us, to ignore these growing problems, avoid fixing them, and hope they don't crash down upon us, while we're in office.

Or, we can lead. That is what the people of Minnesota elected us to do. That is what they need us to do.
They need us to lead our state forward. Not back to failed ideologies of the past, now masquerading in new jargon. Not remaining locked into what might have worked in the past; but is faltering now, and will likely fail in the future.

It is an awesome responsibility to know that Minnesota's future will depend, in part, on the choices that we are called upon to make.
Those choices will not be easy; and some of them will not be popular. But it is time to prove that Minnesota's leaders are capable of more than ideological skirmishes and political stalemates, which offend our state's citizens and jeopardize our state's future.
This is our time and our responsibility ... to work together and build a state that works.
So, if you're coming to this State Capitol during the next four months, bring your best ideas and your sincere convictions. Bring your work boots and your hard hats. If you're interested in nothing more than throwing rocks and casting blame, send the rest of us a letter ... or a postcard.
But if you really want to pitch in, all the way in, even sacrifice a little of your self-interest for everyone's better interests ... welcome. We need you. Your state needs you.
And please remember always. You're here to serve the best interests of all the people of Minnesota. Not just your clients. Not just your constituents. Not just the people, who agree with you. Or who agree with me.
You are here. I am here. We are all here ... to serve All of Minnesota. To serve the cause of a Better Minnesota.
So, let us begin.

When I ran for Governor four years ago, I promised "A Better Minnesota." Tonight, I can report that the state of our State is better - much better -- than before. It's better for us, and it's better for those who will inherit it from us. But the economic growth and social progress we have achieved, also reminds us of the work we still have left to do.
Becoming a parent introduces a longer-term perspective. We begin to consider the effects of our actions not only on our own lives, but also on lives that will extend beyond ours.
Becoming a grandparent, as I did a year-ago, thanks to my terrific son and wonderful daughterin-law, Eric and Cory Dayton, who are in the gallery tonight, adds another generation to that timeline. It also raises the stakes.
Somewhere down the road, my grandson and his generation will assess the state of the state we have left to them. They will decide whether we, through our actions or inactions, made their lives better. Let's keep them in mind, as we choose our state's path.
In my first State of the State, three years ago, I said, "I know what we must do to create that better future for all of us. To progress, we have to invest.
"We have to invest in more jobs. Invest in better education. In improved transportation. In the health of our citizens, our communities, and our environment. In the transformation of government services."
In other words, we have to invest in growth, quality, and effectiveness.

Well, we invested in jobs. Minnesota's private sector and public sector both invested in jobs. We are blessed with so many outstanding businesses, located everywhere in our state, operating everywhere in the world - and who, during the past three years, rediscovered that they can be successful and profitable here in Minnesota. As a result, we have the 5th fastest growing economy in the country.
There are more than 2.8 million jobs in Minnesota today. More jobs than ever before in our state's history. 150,000 more jobs than when I became Governor three years ago.
This economic growth is happening all over our state. A recent newspaper story was entitled, "Lots of jobs find a home on the prairie in southwestern Minnesota." It said that, for example, Jackson County reported a 5 percent increase in jobs during 2013. The City of Jackson's economic development coordinator is quoted saying that, "Everybody who is able to work, and willing, is probably employed."
Jackson's largest employer, AGCO, has doubled its workforce to more than 1,300. Nearby, HitchDoc, which manufactures automotive and farm equipment for 300 customers, has grown from a dozen employees to 140. "And I'm looking for another 30," said the company's owner, Brad Mohns. "I'm turning down work, because I can't find enough employees."
Some people believe there is no role for government in private sector expansion and job creation. To see that they're mistaken, just look around Minnesota.
There would not be a new stadium under construction in Minneapolis without the financial support of the City and the State of Minnesota. 7500 construction workers will have jobs building that stadium over the next couple years. Over one-third of them will be people of color.
Located right next to the stadium will be a $400 million private sector development, the largest in a generation. It will provide office space for 5000 Wells Fargo employees, residential apartments, stores and shops, a hotel, and a new, two-block public park. Its construction will employ another 1000 Minnesotans. And that is just the beginning of the area's revitalization.
Another new stadium is being constructed in downtown St. Paul. It would not have occurred without an investment by that City and the State of Minnesota. It will anchor the resurgence of the Lowertown Neighborhood in our Capitol City.
Perhaps the most transformative development project anywhere will occur in Rochester, thanks to the world-renowned Mayo Clinic's decision to build its expanded Destination Medical Center there. Already Minnesota's largest private employer, Mayo expects this multi-billion dollar expansion to double its employment over the next twenty years. The Center will be surrounded by new hotels, restaurants, stores, and recreational opportunities.
This project will enhance Rochester's standing, as the premier health care center in the world. It will establish Minnesota as one of the world's best locations for advanced medical research; the development of new medical treatments and technologies; and the thousands of good new jobs they will create. This project would not be happening without Mayo's extraordinary commitment. It would not be happening here in Minnesota without the significant state investment approved by the legislature last year, along with investments by the City of Rochester and Olmsted County.
There are many more successes. Segetis in Hoyt Lakes, Price Mechanical in Maple Grove, AXIS Clinicals in Dilworth, Viracon in Owatonna, Shutterfly in Shakopee, AAR Corporation in Duluth, Toro in Bloomington, Baxter in Brooklyn Park, WFSI in Sauk Rapids, and 3M in Maplewood, all located or expanded their businesses and created jobs all over Minnesota, partly as a result of their financial partnerships with the state and local governments.
There will be many more, if we are smart enough to continue making those investments. But there won't be as many, if we are not.

To illustrate, let's go to Luverne and Worthington, right next to the South Dakota and Iowa borders.
Both cities report opportunities to expand existing businesses and attract new ones. However, they desperately need more water. Without it, business growth is being stifled, new jobs are being lost, and residents are being forced to buy bottled water. Meanwhile, the solution to their water problems, the Lewis & Clark pipeline, is stalled at the Minnesota-South Dakota border, due to lack of public investment.
The federal government has essentially bailed on the project, despite the strenuous efforts of our Minnesota Congressional Delegation. The $71 million needed to complete the pipeline's Minnesota leg must come mostly from us, or that region's growth in population, businesses, and jobs will suffer.
The harsh reality is that there is probably not enough room in an $850 million bonding bill to fund the pipeline's construction all the way through Luverne, into Worthington, and on to the Iowa border. However, there could well be enough room in a larger bonding bill to complete the Minnesota segment and turn the water on in Luverne and Worthington. Otherwise, they will have to wait at least until the next bonding bill, one or two years from now.
Why am I for a $1.2 Billion bonding bill? Because I'm for jobs. Our building this pipeline means jobs now and more jobs in the future. It means this region of our state will have the opportunity to grow and to prosper. Isn't that a purpose we can all support? I hope so.
There are other cities throughout Minnesota, which need the state's financial support to complete key projects that will bring them new businesses, new jobs, new people, and new economic growth. Those job-creating projects will either be funded in this year's bonding bill, or they will lose out again. That decision is yours in the legislature.

Improving education is closely connected with good jobs and economic growth. It is also closely connected with our citizens' health and well-being. I am very pleased to report that we have made significant new investments in education, all the way from early childhood through postsecondary, and improved results are beginning to show.
We started in 2011, when, despite facing a projected $6 Billion deficit, we increased K-12 education funding by $223 million, reversing a decade of declining state support for our public schools.
The 2011 legislature also passed an Alternative Pathway for Teacher Licensure and a "Read Well by Third Grade" literacy initiative. It enacted comprehensive teacher and principal evaluations. Principal evaluations began last fall, and teacher evaluations will start state-wide this September.

Last year, the 2013 legislature made $485 million of new investments in education. It increased the per-pupil aid formula as well as support for Special Education. State funding for early childhood education scholarships was increased to $46 million last year, and the Senate wants to raise that amount this year. Early childhood education is real education reform.
The legislature also passed one of my consistent priorities; and state-funded, all-day kindergarten will begin this fall. Studies show that both early childhood and all-day kindergarten can make crucial differences in boosting students' performances and closing achievement gaps. So do nutritious hot school lunches. No child should be shamed because parents can't afford lunch. Hopefully, that funding will soon be enacted.
And, very significantly, during the past two-and-a-half years, we have repaid ALL of the $2.8 Billion previously borrowed from our schools. Now, school districts can put their money into classrooms, not bank loans. Let us vow that no more will we balance state budgets by creating deficits in school budgets.
Just weeks ago, the legislature passed strong anti-bullying legislation. That is also important education reform. Children don't learn at school, if they are scared. Or made to feel bad about themselves.
Once, Minnesota students competed successfully not only with students around the country, but also with kids around the world. We are on our way to doing that again.
Testing by the Trends in International Math and Science Study ranks Minnesota #9 among world educational systems in Science and 6th in Mathematics.
Back home, in the most recent National Assessment of Educational Progress testing, Minnesota's 4th graders tested #1 in the nation in math. They ranked 10th best in reading, which was a big improvement from 22nd the year before. Very important was that the state's reading gap for African-American and Latino 4th graders closed by 10 points from 2009 to 2013.
Our 8th graders ranked 11th best in the nation in reading and 5th best in math.
We have had the highest ACT scores among seniors for 8 years running, and our graduation rate, nearly 80%, is the highest in a decade.
Regarding higher education, we have started to make progress, but we have quite a ways to go. In fiscal 2012, state support for higher education, in real, after-inflation dollars, fell to its lowest level since 1981. Last year's legislature began to reverse that trend, and increased state funding for higher education by a record $248.5 million.
One result from that declining state funding had been the increased reliance on tuition revenues to fund our public colleges and universities. According to the College Board, in this school year

Minnesota has the 4th highest in-state tuition and fees for two-year public colleges and the 12th highest for four-year colleges and universities. Last year's legislature wisely imposed two-year freezes on tuitions at the University of Minnesota and the MnSCU colleges and universities.
In addition, the State Grant Program was expanded. As a result, over Minnesota 100,000 students have received increased state financial aid this year.

Improved transportation is also essential to support economic growth and a Better Minnesota. Unfortunately, Minnesota's highways, roads, bridges, and public transit systems have been underfunded for the past quarter-century. Federal funds, state gas tax revenues, license fees, and the other traditional sources of transportation funding have not kept pace with escalating project costs.
Every day, Minnesotans everywhere suffer the consequences of that serious underfunding. Congested freeways. Unsafe two-lane highways. Deteriorating roads and bridges. Inadequate public transit systems. Inadequate transportation systems stifle economic growth and cost jobs.
The future of transportation in Minnesota and the funding for it have to be among the 2015 legislative session's top priorities. Whatever is decided -- whether to do nothing, a little, or a lot -- will have an enormous impact on the lives of all Minnesotans - for decades.
Some say that MnDOT should be looking to save money by becoming more efficient. Well, they have. $50 million in construction savings have been identified that can now be used to advance other important projects, such as a much-needed third lane on Highway 494 in Plymouth.
MnDOT officials have also outlined one possible combination of funds, which could nearly raise the $6 Billion of additional revenues needed over the next ten years to maintain, expand, and improve our state's transportation systems. Obviously, it would be very expensive. It would, however, cost less than doing nothing.

A better Minnesota also means a healthier Minnesota. We can take satisfaction in our national ranking as the third healthiest state. And the Commonwealth Fund has just announced that Minnesota ranks as the best state in the country for health system performance, which includes health care access, quality, costs, and outcomes.
I am especially proud that we've expanded access to affordable, high-quality health care, while at the same time reducing state health care costs. The Department of Human Services has saved taxpayers over $1 Billion through more competitive contracts for our state health care programs.
Among the states, we have the fifth lowest percentage of citizens without health insurance coverage. 8 percent of our residents are uninsured, compared to the national average of 14.8 percent. And our state's entire health care network deserves credit for enabling MNsure to offer the lowest insurance rates of any Health Exchange.
These low rates have helped MNsure enroll over 206,000 Minnesotans in affordable health coverage -- many for the first time. MNsure didn't start well, but it's gotten better, and it will keep on improving.
It's also important to remember that the federal Affordable Care Act provides all Minnesotans with some very important protections, whether they obtain their insurance through MNsure or not. No one can be denied coverage, because of pre-existing conditions. There can be no lifetime limit on a person's health care needs. Young adults are covered under their parents' health insurance plans until the age of 26. Certain screenings for cancer and other preventative procedures are free.
Here in Minnesota, we greatly enhanced the well-being of many of our citizens by passing into law last year's Marriage Equality legislation.
However, there is always more that we can do. Better school physical education programs will encourage children and youths to enjoy physical exercise and appreciate its benefits. The Statewide Health Improvement Program (SHIP) helps people of all ages to become healthy and to stay healthy.
Under SHIP, the Cites of Frazee and Fergus Falls have adopted "Complete Streets" policies, making it easier for residents to incorporate physical activity into their daily routines.
In Fairmont, SHIP has helped community leaders create Safe Routes to Schools. They have installed wider crosswalks, additional safety guards, pedestrian and bike safety education, and a "Walking Tuesday" program at four elementary schools.
Farm to school/ Healthier food programs have taken off under SHIP. In just four years, 29 percent of Minnesota's schools have implemented Farm to School strategies, providing access to locally grown fresh fruits and vegetables to more than 272,000 students.
In Kelliher, for example, SHIP has brought healthier food to the public schools with more fresh fruits and vegetables and more local foods. Kelliher's Superintendent reports that for the first time in 20 years, the school's hot breakfast and lunch budgets are in the black. Last year, at this time, they were between $30,000 and $40,000 in the red.
Healthier habits, lower costs and supporting local economies. That's what SHIP is about.
We also need to support caregivers who are taking care of aging parents. My proposed State Income Tax Credit for Child Care costs would apply equally to the costs of care for dependent, disabled, or elderly family members. I urge that this tax credit be included in the second tax bill.


We must also work continuously to improve government services and provide Minnesotans with the quality and the efficiency they deserve. We have made real progress, and we have much more to do.
We've reduced environmental permitting times, as well as the time it takes the Department of Labor and Industry to license plumbers, electricians and other professionals. And DVS's car registration turnarounds have been slashed from 90 to 19 days.
The Department of Veterans Affairs completely reworked their website, allowing the 490,000 people who visit it each year to more easily access information about veterans' benefits and services. The Department of Natural Resources created a one-stop shop for all State Park camping reservations and license purchases. What used to take campers 11 clicks from the DNR home page to reserve a campsite online. Now it takes only two clicks.
Last year, I recommended that this year's legislative session be the "Unsession." The response has been tremendous! Thousands of Minnesota citizens offered ideas to improve state government at the State Fair, on-line, and in-person.
We also received terrific ideas and suggestions from hundreds of State employees. I thank them for their interest and participation. No one knows better how to improve government services than the people who work provide them. I also thank legislators, who added their own initiatives and who have taken valuable time during this short session to give consideration to the 1000 proposals submitted by my administration.
They all have one goal: to create a Better Government for a Better Minnesota. I have already signed 121 provisions into law. They include the first middle-class tax cut bill, which simplifies the preparation of federal and state taxes, saving one and one-half million Minnesota taxpayers time and money.
This work may not grab news headlines, but it is very important. It is what citizens should rightfully expect from their government. It is what I expect.
I ask the legislature tonight to continue this work and pass the remaining Unsession bills.
While we have made great progress toward a Better Minnesota, it should also serve as a reminder of the work left to do. The middle class is still struggling in our state and all over our country. There is still too much poverty and inequality. There is too much uncertainty and anxiety about the future. Of the 145,000 Minnesotans, who are unemployed, over one-fourth have been without jobs for more than 27 weeks. Nationally, that number is more than a third.
We need more jobs that pay enough to raise families; jobs that have good benefits; that offer retirement security; and keep pace with the cost of living. Too many Minnesotans have to work two or three jobs to try to make ends meet.

We took a very important step two weeks ago, when the legislature increased the state's minimum wage and indexed it to inflation. When fully in effect, 325,000 Minnesotans will earn almost $500 million more every year.
At $8.00 per hour effective this August, a worker's earnings will still be one-third below the federal poverty level for a family of four. At $9.50 per hour in two more years, earnings will remain one-fifth below the poverty level.
Nevertheless, those increases will be enormously important to them and their families. They will use that money to give their children better lives. They will use it to buy necessities, and much will be spent quickly and locally. A higher minimum wage leads to more economic growth by rewarding hard work and improving workers' productivity.
In a couple weeks, I will be speaking for the fourth year at the Minnesota Prayer Breakfast. This year, the theme is "Unity." I am going to say that, unfortunately, where I work, unity in an election year is an oxymoron.
But the truth is . . . we're all in the same boat together. We're all in the same rough seas. We can affect much of what occurs here in Minnesota and improve our state. However, we are part of a very big world.
One which is ever more inter-connected and moving very fast.
Today, the U.S. economy comprises 22% of the entire world economy. In 1960, however, the U.S. share was almost 39%.
Other countries' standings in the global economy have also changed. In the last quarter century, Japan's share of the world's GDP has dropped to half of what it was. China's has increased seven times. Germany's share fell by almost half, while Brazil's more than doubled.
What does this mean? That the world economy is very dynamic, with big winners and losers over time. The U.S. economy is still dominant, but other countries are catching up to us. And they don't want to join us; they want to beat us.
The recent serious recession and slow recovery from it evidence a profound economic change. We used to make here most of what we bought here. And we made it better here than anywhere else in the world. That was our overwhelming competitive advantage, which drove our economic dominance and steadily raised the living standards of our growing middle-class.
In past years, it has shifted. The rest of the world now makes much of what we buy here. However, they cannot yet afford to buy enough of the goods and services we produce here, to replace the jobs that we have lost. And we have not created enough new ideas to launch enough new businesses to provide enough new jobs for everyone who wants and needs one.
This intensified global competition will dominate the rest of our lives, our children's and our grandchildren's lives. How we respond will determine the quality of the lives we all live.
Here in Minnesota, we are better prepared than succeed in this new global economy - because of the ingenuity and productivity found everywhere in our state. From our farmers, who have made Minnesota the 4th largest agriculture exporting state in the nation, to our Iron Range mining companies, who have merged new technology with tried and true methods.
Farmers, steel workers, loggers, plant workers, construction crews, teachers, nurses, truck drivers, corporate executives, and public employees. They are living proof that we have always earned our success. By working harder. By managing better. By innovating smarter. By producing more efficiently. Per capita, we have the highest number of Fortune 500 companies headquartered here. 3M. General Mills. Target. United Health Group. They didn't move here. They started here.
Cargill. Marvin. Andersen. Carlson. Digi-Key. Toro. Schwan's. Polaris. Arctic Cat. Magnetation. Medtronic. Mayo. They, and too many others to mention, began with an entrepreneur with an idea. Which became a product or service. Which other industrious people built into other products and services. Which succeeded, because they were designed well, produced well, and serviced well, by well-educated, talented, and hard-working Minnesotans. Working together, they have produced success after success after success. And they have built a state, which reflects their values and virtues.
That was the key to our past success. It will also be the key to our future success. What we have to do for a better future is what we did for a better past. We have to invest. We have to invest in our people. We have to invest in economic growth. We have to invest in a Better Minnesota.

We have to invest in better education. Education that teaches people what they will need to succeed in the world of the future, not the world of the past. We need to invest in their new ideas, in their new ways to solve problems. We need to invest in their better health. We need to invest in a cleaner environment to keep them healthier for longer. And we need to invest in the infrastructure they need to live productive lives: efficient transportation, reliable sewer and water systems, and high-speed world-communications.
We have begun that process by recognizing the critical importance of our investments in education, and reversing their decline. Increasing our commitment to early childhood education will be one key to closing the achievement gap and enabling all of our children to become successful adults. Let us all commit that by 2018, all three and four year olds in Minnesota will have access to quality, affordable early childhood education.
Then, from the beginning of their elementary school educations, we must teach our children how to think creatively. To learn how to learn. To learn to love to learn. Creative people develop new ideas, which start new enterprises, which provide new jobs. Creative people figure out how to do their work more efficiently and productively.

The excessive amounts of time and rote learning required by today's excessive school testing are counter-productive. They stifle teachers' abilities to not only impart information, but also to show kids how to use it. How to apply their knowledge to solve new problems in new areas. And to enjoy doing so.
This approach does not require abandoning testing, as a measure of each student's progress. It does require more efficient, more effective testing. A growing number of elementary schools in Minnesota are applying "one-minute, read-out-loud" tests, which can determine reading levels in just that one minute. Such tests can be repeated throughout the school year, as often as necessary, to measure students' progress and adjust learning strategies accordingly.
Compare that approach to the high-stakes, anxiety-provoking testing, which is now imposed on children in third grade - or even younger. Many children come to school terrified on test days; then go home demoralized. What purpose does it serve to send a third-grader home believing she has failed life, because she may have performed poorly on a test?
Last year, I'm very sorry to say, our state went backwards. More tests were mandated in the upper grade levels. I'm told some tests are required by state statute. Others are necessary to satisfy federal requirements. Still others are added by local school districts. They may make sense individually; but added all together, they do not.
I am asking our Department of Education to prepare for the 2015 legislative session an analysis all of the tests now required at each grade level. And to recommend which ones could be streamlined, combined, or eliminated. I urge next year's legislators to work with state and national experts to reduce the amount of school testing and allow dedicated teachers to spend their time teaching students what they will need for their future success.
Minnesota offers one of the fewest school days per school year in the country. The amount of time students spend in classrooms each day has also declined. Next year's legislature needs to re-evaluate those practices. The rigors of the school day and the school year are important ways to prepare young people for the far more competitive world they will enter.
We also need to consider what environments we offer young people, when they're not in school. It pains me to drive by a school in the early afternoon and see it closed, with its playground locked up. I always wonder, "Where are the kids, who are locked out of their schools? Where do they go, when they have nowhere to go?"
We need our schools to open earlier to offer their students nutritious breakfasts, and we need them to stay open later to provide safety, mentoring, tutoring, exercise, and new learning opportunities. These additional responsibilities would not be placed upon schools' regular teachers. Instead, a new group of adults would take over after regular hours.
Minnesota has the third highest labor force participation rate in the country: over 70 %. Too many of their sons and daughters have too little to do after school and no one watching them do it. Afternoon and evening programs at schools and recreational centers should be community responsibilities. Ask local businesses to help pay for them. Ask major corporations to sponsor them. Ask adults to volunteer one day a week or a month to run them. Get everyone involved in the lives of our children.
Starting in Junior High School, our education system needs to make students aware of the real world opportunities and pitfalls in the world they will be entering. First and foremost, they need to hear again and again and again that continuing their educations will be absolutely essential to achieving the lives they want. Our schools need more guidance counselors, who are specially trained in career guidance, to help junior high and high school students better understand what their opportunities are and how to prepare for them.
Then we must better align our high school and college curricula with the world of the future, not the world of the past. This means we have to provide leading-edge instruction; in world-class schools, colleges, and universities; with state-of-the-art equipment and technology -- all aligned with the good jobs that will be available for their graduates.
The need for this alignment is well-understood by our state's secondary and post-secondary education leaders. However, they need the resources to carry it out.
The State's current bonding levels do not adequately support the improvements that both MnSCU and the U of M must make in their existing physical plants, in new buildings, and in state-of-the-art equipment and technologies -- to continue to attract the best students and give them the best possible educations.
Higher education is by no means alone in suffering from inadequate capital investments. We need to find new revenues to finance.
I have given special emphasis to education, both because I believe it holds the key to our continued growth. I am convinced that whoever retools their education systems to align most effectively with the world their students will live in, and gives them the tools they will need to succeed in it, will prosper. Whoever doesn't, will lag behind.

We also need to increase our investments in new jobs and better jobs throughout our state. Last year, the legislature made major new investments in the Department of Employment & Economic Development's job creating programs. I thank Speaker Thissen and Majority Leader Bakk for their excellent leadership, and I thank all the legislators of both parties who supported those new incentives.
They are already putting more Minnesotans to work. Since last July, the Minnesota Investment Fund has provided companies with low-interest loans totaling $8.4 million, which have leveraged $235 million in private investment.
In January, the new Minnesota Job Creation Fund was launched. It provides pay-for-performance incentives for businesses to locate or expand here. In its first four months, the program has invested $5 million in 10 different business expansion projects (five in Greater Minnesota and five in the Metro area). It has leveraged $87 million of new, private investments, which have created 550 new jobs.
For this session, I proposed an expansion of our Angel Tax Credit program, our State's primary tool to attract private investments into promising business start-ups and growth. They have the potential to become Minnesota's next Fortune 500 companies. Whether they become large or remain small, their success will drive Minnesota's future economic growth.
As I will say at the Prayer Breakfast, Unity may be beyond our reach at the Capitol this year. I don't want to rule it out entirely, with second tax cut, supplemental budget, and bonding bills still ahead. We might surprise ourselves.
But while we may not find a Unity of Means, I believe we do share a Unity of Purpose. We all love this state. We all want to see it prosper. We want our International communities - there are now over 100 languages and dialects spoken in Minnesota - to retain their special identities; yet, also live together harmoniously and work together productively.
We want Minnesota to be the Best. To be the very best it can possibly be. Because we live here. Many of our children and grandchildren will live here. We want them to achieve the very best they can for themselves and for their families.
In his epic saga Giants in the Earth, O. E. Rolvaag wrote, "By attempting the impossible, they accomplished the unbelievable."
Unity of purpose might seem impossible. But if we try, it might just show up, when we really need it. Today is the 150th anniversary of Confederate General Robert E. Lee‚Äôs surrender at Appomattox Court House, which is marked as the end of the American Civil War. It is thus a fitting time to recognize the heroic service of over 24,000 Minnesotans, who fought in that war, and especially the over 2,200 of them, who lost their lives from their service in it.

In his book, entitled The Last Full Measure, Minnesota author, Richard Moe, portrayed soldiers in the First Minnesota Regiment, who sacrificed themselves heroically to protect the Union Army‚Äôs position during the Battle of Gettysburg in 1863. He described them as: ‚ÄúOrdinary young men, who did extraordinary things.‚Äù

They were called upon by President Abraham Lincoln to help ‚ÄúSave the Union.‚Äù They left their families and homes, suffered unimaginable hardships and horrors, risked their lives, and some gave their lives, to preserve this country for the generations who followed.

We are not being called upon to make such extreme sacrifices. Yet, during the remaining six weeks of this legislative session, we will face our own moments of truth: Will we do what is easy, safe, and popular; or will we risk our political lives to preserve this great state for future generations?

May the First Minnesota‚Äôs courage inspire us. For right now, we have a rare moment of great opportunity. The state of our state is good. Not everywhere. Not for everyone. But overall, Minnesota is doing better than it has for some time, and Minnesota is doing better than most other states. 

What we have been doing is working. Minnesota is working. Our unemployment rate is an unusually low 3.7%. In fact, according to Pew Trust‚Äôs research, Minnesota is the only state in the nation, whose employment rate for 25-54 year-olds in 2014 exceeded its pre-recession level in 2007. 

More Minnesota businesses are expanding. So, more Minnesotans are working. They are earning more money, which means they are paying more taxes.

It is that growth in employment, incomes, and profits, not tax increases, that has caused our state‚Äôs biennial budget forecast to go from a $6.2 billion deficit in 2011 to a $1.9 billion surplus today. Income tax rates that apply to 98% of Minnesotans, have remained the same, since I took office. About 2 billion of the $2.1 billion tax increase was paid by the state‚Äôs wealthiest 2% of households, large corporations, and increased tobacco taxes. Those revenues went to cover a projected $627 million deficit and to pay off the $2.8 billion owed our school districts. Then, last year, 2 million Minnesotans received over $500 million in tax cuts.

So, let me repeat: It is Minnesota‚Äôs economic successes, not tax increases, that have produced our present budget surplus.

When it comes to economic success, Minnesota is unique. In most states, a budget surplus is applauded. Going from a deficit to a surplus is seen as a sign that the state is heading in the right direction -- that policymakers are doing things right ‚Äì so keep it up. 

But not in Minnesota. Here, some people say the reason we have a budget surplus is because we‚Äôre doing things wrong.

They say things like: Taxes are too high. They are bloating state revenues, fueling excessive government spending, driving successful businesses and individuals away, and ruining our future.

I have heard that complaint many times, throughout the 38 years I have been involved in Minnesota government. If we have a budget deficit, it‚Äôs because taxes are too high. If there‚Äôs a surplus, taxes are too high. Whatever is wrong with Minnesota, taxes are too high.

However, many national experts view our state‚Äôs economic policies and results far more positively than do our in-state critics.

This year, Politico Magazine ranked Minnesota as ‚ÄúThe Best American State.‚Äù

Forbes Magazine ranked Minnesota second for ‚ÄúQuality of Life,‚Äù third for ‚ÄúBest Place to Make a Living‚Äù and the ninth ‚ÄúBest State for Business.‚Äù

A group called ‚ÄúMichigan Future,‚Äù led by some of that state‚Äôs top business and philanthropic leaders, issued a report: ‚ÄúState Policies Matter: How Minnesota‚Äôs Tax, Spending and Social Policies Help it Achieve the Best Economy Among Great Lakes States.‚Äù

The report concluded: ‚ÄúThere is no question Minnesota is a high-tax state. ‚Ä¶ But it has largely invested that additional revenue in services and investments that matter in a knowledge-based economy. An educated workforce, efficient transportation systems, vibrant cities and metropolitan areas, and a secure safety net for those making the transition to a global economy, all matter in creating a prosperous state.‚Äù

Closer to home, recent state newspaper headlines have proclaimed:

‚ÄúManufacturing expansions in Minnesota are booming, creating jobs.

‚ÄúMore Minnesota manufacturers say they're 'thriving.'‚Äù

‚ÄúNew Product Orders, Hiring Surge in Minnesota.‚Äù

And, ‚ÄúOutstate economies are first to recover from the recession.‚Äù

As I have said before, the credit for this success belongs to the people of Minnesota. To the business owners and executives, who have chosen to locate and expand here, because they found it profitable to do so. To their hard-working, productive employees, who helped make those decisions successful. To the teachers, professors, and other educators, who provide, overall, the best educations to the most students of any state in the country, as proven again by our top ACT scores for the 9th straight year. To the doctors, nurses, state and local government workers, service providers, lawyers, accountants, computer science experts, and other professionals and their dedicated support staffs.

Unfortunately, our state‚Äôs successes are seldom acknowledged inside this building. Its inhabitants are too preoccupied with assigning blame for real and imagined shortcomings. So, I want to take this opportunity to recognize the accomplishments of the people of Minnesota. And to say, ‚ÄúThank You.‚Äù You are remarkable citizens. You have achieved extraordinary successes, which have boosted our state to its place today.

Besides reflecting the truth, a recognition of our state‚Äôs overall success has other benefits. It puts in proper perspective the assessments of our shortcomings, inequities, and areas needing improvement. We still have an unacceptable gap in academic achievement among students of color. There is a widening disparity between the stagnant incomes of middle-class Minnesota families and the wealthiest. Our workplace policies are not giving families the flexibility they need to balance work responsibilities with family responsibilities. The number of people, who depend upon our public healthcare programs, and those programs‚Äô costs, continue to escalate. Both the quality and the capacity of our highway, road, bridge, and public transit systems continue to deteriorate. Our state and federal Constitutions still do not provide Minnesotans with gender equality under the law.

There are also industries in our state, areas of our state, and groups of people with unmet needs. Over 1100 workers at two U.S. Steel plants on the Iron Range are facing imminent layoffs of unknown durations. Minnesota turkey growers have already lost several hundred thousand birds due to an unusual strain of Avian flu. Increasing numbers of our children lack adequate physical protections, emotional support, and alternative homes. They, and others, need and deserve our help. With a $2 billion budget surplus, we can afford to help.

Acknowledging our state‚Äôs overall success also provides more realistic guidance for future decisions, by reframing the debate. Refocused properly, it‚Äôs not: What must we do to save our state from disaster? To: What can we do to create an even better future? As I said before, we have a unique opportunity right now, to dedicate our budget surplus to areas of continuing need or to areas that were previously overlooked. 

By illustration, during my 2010 campaign, I proposed that our state fund all-day kindergarten for all Minnesota children. Some questioned school districts‚Äô interest in providing it; others questioned the need for it; and still others questioned its cost. Finally, in 2013, it passed the legislature, and I signed it into law. At the time, only 54 percent of Minnesota‚Äôs five year-olds were enrolled in a free, all-day kindergarten program. For many of the rest, their parents were paying as much as $4,200 a year to defray the cost. This year, thanks to state funding, 99.6% of Minnesota‚Äôs five year olds are in all-day kindergarten classes, being offered in all but one of our state‚Äôs 954 public elementary school sites.

I thank the school boards, superintendents, principals, teachers, and parents, who responded so enthusiastically and overwhelmingly to this opportunity. And I thank every legislator here tonight, who voted two years ago to make it possible. I expect the reason you seek your job, as do I, is to make lasting improvements in the lives of the people you serve. Well, this time we did, in the lives of young Minnesota children, now and for years to come.

I am frequently asked, ‚ÄúWhat are my top priorities in this session?‚Äù My simple, straight answer is: ‚ÄúEverything.‚Äù Closing the Achievement Gap; Buffer Zones for Better Water Quality and Wildlife Habitat; Tougher Penalties on Poachers; The Increased Funding requested by the Chief Justice for the Judicial Branch; Completion of the Lewis & Clark Water Project; Final Capitol Restoration; funding for broadband, and all the rest. I would not have proposed any of them, if I didn‚Äôt believe they were important to a Better Minnesota.

At the very top, however, are education and transportation. They are essential to our future. So, let me go back to education, where I just left off.

In my budget request for the next biennium, I have proposed spending an additional $694.6 million above the February Forecast‚Äôs base amount for E-12 education in FY 16-17. In its targets, the Senate has proposed a $361.5 million increase above that base; the House $156.7 million.

A question I hear about my budget proposal is, ‚ÄúMore money for education? But we spend so much already.‚Äù

It‚Äôs true that we have significantly increased state funding for K-12 education, since I took office. And I emphasize the word, ‚ÄúWE.‚Äù In my first term, the legislature, under both Republican and DFL control, increased state funding for the Per-Pupil Aid Formula, for the Read Well by Third Grade initiative, for Special Education, for School Lunches and for the start of free Elementary School Breakfasts. ALL were enacted with bi-partisan support. So, understandably, some people are asking, ‚ÄúHaven‚Äôt we done enough?‚Äù

However, the most recent Census Bureau report on Public Education Finances ranks Minnesota 24th among the states in Per-Pupil Expenditures for K-12 Education. Our recent increases have lifted our standing, but our financial commitment to educating our children is just average, compared with other states. Just average is not nearly good enough. 

We have the 11th highest per-capita income among the states. A rank of 24th in per-pupil K-12 education expenditures by a state with the 11th highest per-capita income means that at least thirteen other states are making greater financial efforts than we are to educate our children.

The previous decade‚Äôs cuts in education funding are still taking their toll. We can be proud of our bi-partisan improvements over the past four years; but it‚Äôs not a reason to stand still. Or to slide backward.

I have also proposed a major new early childhood education initiative to fund pre-kindergarten classes for all of our state‚Äôs four year-olds. Taken on its own, this proposal has the power to transform the trajectory of Minnesota‚Äôs youngest learners. But my proposal doesn‚Äôt stop there. I am also proposing significant increases in childcare assistance, elimination of the Head Start waiting list, funding for home visiting, more resources to continue building the quality of childcare through Parent Aware, and expanded tax credits to parents for the costs of their child. In the education budget area alone, I am proposing $372 million in additional funding to care for and educate our state‚Äôs children between the ages of 0 to 4 years-old.

I strongly urge the groups now fighting over how that additional funding should be allocated to work cooperatively with the legislature to find the best solution. In my view, it‚Äôs not either/or. It‚Äôs both.

At the other end of the education continuum, higher education: the University of Minnesota, the MnSCU colleges, and universities, and state financial aid for students are equally deserving of increased support. In 2013, the legislature approved a $249 million increase in higher education funding for the current biennium. That increase, however, only replaced the $246 million reduction enacted in 2011.

In real, inflation-adjusted dollars, state support for higher education in FY 2012 dropped to its lowest level in over thirty years. No wonder tuitions have been forced higher and higher in both systems, causing Minnesota students to graduate with the fifth highest average debt loads in the country.

The tuition freezes we enacted for last year and this year at the MnSCU and U of M campuses were important steps toward reducing the hardships that high tuitions impose on Minnesota students and their families; but they were only first steps. I am proposing those tuition freezes be continued into the next two years. I also ask the legislature to support needed increases in the state‚Äôs financial aid programs for Minnesota students.

In both my regular budget and bonding bill proposals, I am advocating for increased state support for upgrading the University‚Äôs Medical School, its Veterinary Research, for new MnSCU programs, as well as $70 million to each system for badly needed repairs on campuses throughout the state. We need those improvements to offer world-class postsecondary educations in world-class facilities. Without them, we won‚Äôt be competitive in attracting the students we need for our state‚Äôs future vitality.

I also urge legislators to work even more closely with the University‚Äôs and MnSCU‚Äôs boards, administrators, faculties, and my administration, to identify Minnesota employers‚Äô unmet needs for graduates with specialized skills and determine how best to meet them. I ask each legislator to bring business leaders together with higher education administrators in her or his district; find out how well those campuses are providing the training needed for present and future workforces; and bring solutions to this and future legislative sessions.

The Chief Executive Officers of so many companies have told me that the number one reason why they chose to expand here rather than in other states was the quality of Minnesota‚Äôs workforce, which is also directly related to the quality of their educations. However, the future superiority of our workforce and their productivity is in no way guaranteed. It must be continuously earned.

These and other education initiatives are critically important for many reasons. The quality of our state is, and will be, determined primarily by the quality of our citizens, which will be influenced strongly by the quality of their educations.

All sorts of social measures ‚Äì from better health, to higher productivity, to lower crime rates ‚Äì are strongly correlated with levels of educational attainment. The amount of legislative funding for improved education, all the way from early childhood through postsecondary, will measure your commitments to our state‚Äôs future. 

My second top priority for this legislative session is to begin to improve our state‚Äôs aging and inadequate transportation systems, by increasing investments in better highways, roads, bridges, and public transit. For the past twenty-five years, those investments lagged behind what was needed to maintain them, much less to improve them.

I am very pleased that both the Senate and the House have recognized the necessity to make these critically important improvements. However, we still need to reach agreements on the amounts of those investments and how to assure they will continue reliably over the next decade.

It is tempting to allocate a significant amount of the current surplus to fund transportation projects. However, we are unlikely to see surpluses of this magnitude in future years, given the slower pace of this national economic recovery and its vulnerability to unforeseeable world events. Whatever future national economic growth does occur, will likely be less than that experienced in the post-World War II decades, before the Great Recession.

Thus, reallocating General Fund dollars to pay for essential transportation improvements will inevitably pit those needs against educating our children; caring properly for for our elderly; enhancing our natural resources; fulfilling the important promises of the Working Parents Act; and providing quality, affordable health care for all our citizens.

People should not be pitted against projects. Both are too important.

There are other needed infrastructure improvements throughout our state. Our budget surplus provides us with opportunities to invest in better public buildings; athletic and cultural facilities; advanced communication networks; water quality and wildlife habitat improvements; and state parks and trails, all of which make vital contributions to our state‚Äôs quality of life. They enhance our appeal to current retirees, Baby Boomer near-retirees, Generation Xers, Millennials, and generations still unnamed -- all of whom will ask themselves: What does this state offer to me? To my family? My career success? My recreation? My safety? And so much more.

Talented, successful people can choose where they want to live. We are in competition for them with the rest of our country and the rest of the world. It would be, as the old saying goes: ‚ÄúPenny Wise and Pound Foolish,‚Äù not to increase our investments in a Better Minnesota by passing a bonding bill this year.

Some people are telling us to ‚ÄúJust wait until next year‚Äù for my $842 million bonding bill. That just doesn‚Äôt make sense. Interest rates remain low; we have capacity for the debt service within existing guidelines; and many of those and other improvements are urgently needed.

How can we tell the citizens and businesses in Worthington to ‚Äújust wait another year‚Äù for a reliable supply of safe drinking water? Or tell people in Willmar to ‚Äúwait another year‚Äù before rerouting rail cars with volatile fuels away from their city; or St. Cloud area residents to ‚Äúwait another year‚Äù for public safety improvements to the nearby correctional facility?

The legislature has passed a bonding bill in 31 of the past 32 sessions ‚Äì in both even- and odd-numbered years. Waiting now, for another year, is inexplicable and should be unacceptable.

I am also unwilling to wait another year ‚Äì or longer ‚Äì for legislation that will significantly improve Minnesota‚Äôs water. Some lakes, rivers, and streams all over our state have become dangerously polluted ‚Äì so bad that fish can‚Äôt live in them and people shouldn‚Äôt swim in them. One Minnesotan living in a town providing free bottled water to its residents after its water treatment plant malfunctioned, said, ‚Äúthat‚Äôs just the way it is, living here.‚Äù

I disagree. That should not be ‚Äújust the way it is,‚Äù living anywhere in Minnesota. No one person or industry is responsible for our state‚Äôs deteriorating water quality; but every one of us is responsible for improving it.

Yet, the headline in this week‚Äôs Outdoor News reads: ‚ÄúBuffer Bill has No Future‚Äù in this legislative session. I find that hard to believe and impossible to accept. You ARE the bill‚Äôs future. Passing it is your responsibility.

If all the interest groups, who oppose my bill, spent half as much time improving it as they do criticizing it, it would have passed already. My initial proposal is condemned for being ‚ÄúOne size fits all.‚Äù Well then, tell us how many sizes, in what shapes, as determined by whom, will fit all?

Everyone professes to want clean water. Too many, however, don‚Äôt want to do what‚Äôs necessary to get it. And everyone means not just farmers, but also municipalities, industries, landowners, and everyone else. It‚Äôs time for all of us to work together to pass a bill this session that will protect our citizens from polluted water.  

In closing, our continued success won‚Äôt just happen. We must make it happen. We must invest what we have now to improve what we do have. And to correct what‚Äôs missing.

That won‚Äôt happen by distributing our surplus to each of our constituents. That‚Äôs what a corporate board does, when they‚Äôre breaking up the enterprise. They cash it out, distribute it to their stockholders, close the doors, and go home.

Minnesota‚Äôs success will continue, if we do what successful farmers, business owners, homeowners, and other franchise owners do ‚Äì pool our resources, invest them wisely, and create an even more prosperous future.

We will be judged by what we do. This is our moment of truth. Minnesota‚Äôs future is now in our hands. How will future historians judge our wisdom, our innovation, and our courage? I believe historians will judge us the way we, as parents, judge ourselves: have we passed onto our children the opportunities for a better life? Are we leaving Minnesota a better place for our children ‚Äì a state with more opportunities, an even better natural environment, and an education that ensures that each of our children will have a real chance for success? Over the next six weeks, we will answer those questions. I want our answer to be ‚Äúyes ‚Äì we leave the children of Minnesota that chance for a better life. 