Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislature, the Judiciary, Constitutional

Officers, and Citizens of Minnesota.

1. Welcome, not only to a new Session, but a renewed capitol. With these  updated facilities and with standing committees having been holding weekly
sessions, you will have an opportunity to test whether 120 days is now ample time to accomplish the necessary business.
I appear before you for two reasons. I want to, and I am instructed to. The Minnesota Constitution says: The Governor shall communicate by message
to each Session of the Legislature such information touching the State and
condition of the country as he may deem expedient.

1968 was a year short on joy and long on violence and sorrow. A year in

which we saw the fantastic success of Apollo VIII and the seizure of universities by militants, the tragedy of Chicago, the paralysis of New York, and the

slaying of a national leader and a presidential candidate. It was a year which brought almost more history than a people can bear.

We meet today at a time when the world seems cruel and often absurd. Many of our people are cynical, disillusioned, frustrated, bitter. Other nations doubt us we doubt ourselves.
The public looks to governmental institutions and sees scores of federal
programs which haven't really made the dent on poverty and hunger that was
intended. It hears about the passage of glamorous programs, then learns they haven't been funded. The American people agonize as their sons die in Viet

Nam while negotiators in Paris quibble about the shape of a table.


Large numbers of students are legitimately frustrated with educational
institutions that sometimes get in the way of learning. A smaller but more
vocal group on campuses from Columbia to Oshkosh to San Francisco seek not to
change the system but to destroy it.
Some adults, questioning the religious institution, are disrupting their
worship services, and a good share of the young never even bother to go.
Whether you look at government, education, religion or business, the
11 pressure and strain on these institutions has brought them to the breaking
point.
For too long we've been worshipping their great empty forms, forgetting
to see if their spirit was dying. For too many aLmost 70% of all Americans 1969 doesn't look much
 different or looks worse than 1968 because our institutions seem uninter-
ested or incapable.
Our people cry out for systems that serve the individual first and solve his problems best. If we should fail to hear that plea or neglect it, we as a people are in deep trouble. Then there is no hope for this nation, no future for democracy. Either in a fit of rage and passion we can demolish our institutions, or we can recognize that individuals renew institutions. Individuals with the
courage to ask "Does the system serve?" and "Whom does it serve?" Individuals with the creativity and energy to answer, "How it can serve." Given the resolve for service, we can fashion the kind of society our forefathers could only dream of.
" I am confident we have such men. For over 175 years, the U.S. has been bombarded with problems. Yet our people have marched through history with a sense of purpose and a hope in tomorrow. They were a strong people who saw
in America a vision of greatness. We, too, have that strength. If we did not, surely there would have been no Apollo VIII. To me, this is an exceptional time to be alive. Maybe not the best of times that may be too much to ask but certainly an open and exciting

time

a time of opportunity.

We, like our forebears, are genuinely committed to solving the problems

of the past and easing the problems of the present. But in addition, for the first time in history, a people have wholeheartedly assumed the arduous task
of trying to anticipate and avoid the problems of the future. Part of the reason our problems seem so king-sized, so overwhelming, is
,I not because we as a people are less able to deal with them than our predecessors, but precisely because we are perhaps one of the most sincerely dedicated problem-

solving generations that has ever emerged. We are trying to solve more at one
time than any other generation. Therefore, the issue before America is can we renew our institutions so
they advance, not get in the way of, our commitment.

We, in these halls, are charged with a special responsibility to the institution of government. It is our challenge to seek to restore the people's

faith in the capacity of government to respond to the public's will, and sense its need. The issue before us is simple. Can we re-think, adapt, innovate,
and streamline the institution of government to fully equip it to solve today's I problems and tomorrow's demands? I believe we can.
We demonstrated two years ago by such acts as creating a Metropolitan

Council, a Department of Human Rights, a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, a modernized Department of Economic Development, an accelerated highway program, and many others that State Government can meet modern needs. But we cannot, and I am sure we will not, rest on past achievements. We must demonstrate again this Session that we will not coast. We will take another gigantic step forward in this Decade of Decision.
That step will require action on such important subjects as reorganizing the Executive Branch of State Government, combatting crime, fully guarding the consumer, enhancing our environment, guaranteeing quality education, improving safety and health services, encouraging sound metropolitan development, increasing job opportunities and safety, aiding agriculture, promoting hmnan rights and helping our Senior Citizens. 

Consequently, the first special message I shall send to you will outline the reorganization of the Executive Branch of State Government. No wonder the public is frustrated by the organization of State services. If a man seeks vocational rehabilitation services, there. is a myriad of separate programs scattered throughout five major state agencies. And the frustration for the man who deals with the government occasionally compounds to a mammoth headache for us who work in government daily.
The present structure of the Executive Branch of State Government is an administrative puzzle built by happenstance. Right now, under the jurisdiction of the Governor, there are 84 executive offices, agencies, boards and commissions, some with administrative, quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial authority, or all three. Furthermore, there are 108 advisory bodies, 80 intra-state regional or

interstate bodies, and 11 semi-state or state-related boards or commissions. That means 283 groups that are individually and directly responsible to the Governor.
The reorganization of the Executive Branch is essential to providing efficiency, service and accountability to the people.
Given the effective tools for problem solving, we can set about to prove to our people that a government of, by and for the people really works.
see no reason why this State Government should not be a national leader in rebuilding our people's faith in government in its ability to perform. But the only way to merit their trust is to solve their problems.
Therefore, let me briefly discuss the major problem areas we face this Session.

To my mind and to the minds of Minnesotans, one of the first and fundamental responsibilities of State and Local Government is to protect our people from fear. Fear that comes from:
A burglary every 20 minutes, An auto theft every hour, A robbery every three hours, An aggravated assault every five hours, A forcible rape almost every day. Those are Minnesota statistics. Therefore, I serve notice today on those who prey upon their fellow citizens that law enforcement is a prime and constant concern of this Administration.

That is why we formed the Governor's Crime Commission. That is why those 102 men and women have worked so earnestly. That is why you will be receiving a special message. The message will be detailed and comprehensive, covering crime prevention, law enforcement, and administration of justice, and corrections. 

Another special message shall be presented on a topic of vital interest to every Minnesotan safeguarding the consumer. It will cover a range of legislation directed to inform and safeguard the consumer. I urge your thorough consideration and early passage of sound laws to implement reorganization, to fight crime and to provide consumer protection.
As I said earlier, this generation is unique in its commitment to not only trying to ease the problems of the past and present, but for the first time earnestly striving to avoid problems in the future. 


Nowhere is this particular characteristic more obvious than in the issue of enhancing our environment.
Minnesota has a chance to enhance and cleanse its environment before it is too late. Other states have not been so lucky. The challenge of this Administration and this Session is to save our natural resources.
A. Minnesota's Crystal Waters Program Look first at our water resources. As the land of 15,000 lakes, the
source of the Mississippi, and the western shores of the Great Lakes, with three million acres of water, we don't have much choice. To desecrate our

waters is to destroy our State.

1. The accelerated construction of sewage treatment facilities

would have a tremendous impact on saving pure waters. This is a race against

time. Money spent now would save millions of dollars in inflated construction

costs of facilities which must be built later and save additional millions in

the cost of reclamation projects to restore polluted water.

Right now, nearly Fifty-five Million Dollars of treatment plant

construction is ready to go, on the basis of the community paying 70% of the

cost and the Federal Government 30%. Fifteen Million plus has been authorized

by the Federal Government for its share but only Four Million plus has been

appropriated. The whole program has come to a halt. We cannot wait upon the

fancies and defaults of the Federal Government. This State can and should

act now

not only to aid those now marking time but others who are ordered

to install facilities 

Therefore, I recommend a statewide bonding program to aid local

communities with 30% of construction costs. State funds would be a grant to

municipalities unless or until the Federal Government appropriates sufficient

money to fully fund the presently authorized program. At that time, federal

funds coming to the municipality will reimburse the State.

In the coming Biennium, we will willingly and confidently invest

over Seven Hundred Million Dollars for current expenses for education. Certainly

we can afford a Twenty Million Dollar Bonding program to be repaid over a 20-year

period with the likelihood of substantial federal reimbursement which would

enable us to avoid the catastrophic contamination of our environment. This is

the first part of a four-part Minnesota Crystal Waters Program.

2. In the second part of the crystal Waters Program, the State guarantees responsible lakeshore and lake use regulations to preserve the beauty and life of our lakes.
3. The third recommendation authorizes a study and demonstration project for reclaiming polluted lakes.
4. The last proposal of the Crystal Waters Program requires the consolidation of water resource management now distributed among eight water . related boards into one major state agency.
B. In addition, with greater leisure time for more people to use our natural resources, a conservation-education coordinator is urgently needed to incorporate into the curriculum instruction in wild life values and environmental preservation and acquaint teachers with essential elements of such a program.
But I think we would be the first to admit that not all of the problems of our environment nor its potential for development have been thoroughly explored.
We had five million visits to our State Parks last year. We are just beginning to appreciate the tremendous economic and recreational and historic significance that the Voyageurs National Park will have in Minnesota. The proposal for a Voyageurs National Park, which had received endorsement from the legislatively created Outdoor Recreation and Resources Commission, was introduced as a bill in the last session of Congress. The bill had the support of the entire Minnesota Congressional delegation and will be reintroduced and pushed this session.
We need an intensive study with an early due date on the following three important environmental questions. C. To determine the feasibility of a summer arts facility set in one of
Minnesota's unique natural sites for the study and performance of the visual and performing arts.
D. To analyze the possibilities of a user fee for public waters, which would be a State charge for the use, appropriation or contamination of State waters, be they lakes, streams, or underground systems.
E. To determine a State policy on the funding of dam reconstruction. Many dams constructed in the 1930's are in need of extensive and expensive repair. A State policy on the funding and reconstruction of dams is necessary.
F. Lastly, I urge you to design a program to save space precious space. I strongly recommend a Ten Million Dollar statewide bonding program to fill out some of our existing State Parks and to acquire open space for future recreational uses. Care should be taken that any such acquisition program should be closely coordinated with appropriate planning authority in the area such as the Metropolitan Council in the metropolitan area.
With such a comprehensive program to enhance our environment, we can make sure that in the year 2000 our children can enjoy Minnesota's vast natural resources. It is not too soon to plan for the year 2000. One-half of the people living in Minnesota now will not have reached their fiftieth birthday at the turn of the century. 

Another major challenge of the 1969 Session is improving the quality of education offered to our young people.
The importance of education is obvious. No man is free in any meaningful sense of the word until his mind is free. Then his choices are open, his reach limitless. Little wonder a stable democracy is predicated on a sound education.
Historically, Minnesotans have honored that concept with a tremendous educational investment. During the last two years, we built over 3,330 classrooms, put 417 needy students in college on a new state scholarship program, and saw a 141% increase in the number of people served by vocational rehabilitation, and had the lowest drop-out rate in the nation. In fact, the appropriation for education in this biennium totaled more than the entire state budget just seven years ago.
But we aren't about to rest on our laurels. We can expand the opportunity for education, improve the quality of education, and refine the structure of the educational system.
In pursuit of those goals, I recommend: A. Expanding the State's investment in our young people by a tenfold
increase in our state scholarship program and giving our Indian scholarship program the biggest increase in its history.
B. Strengthening the Higher Education Coordinating Commission by giving it a more prominent role in placing programs and locating new facilities, reviewing budgets and enlarging citizen representation.
C. Granting planning funds for new junior colleges. The Higher Education Coordinating Commission has recommended six new junior colleges be built. Manifestly, they cannot all be constructed in one biennium. We must move now to ease the enormous enrollment pressures on our junior colleges.
D. Since we have committed ourselves to trying to avoid problems in the future, we must realize that behind tomorrow stands not only a problem

but a possible catastrophe. Sixteen percent of our elementary and secondary

students are presently being educated in non-public schools. The enrollment

in private schools had steadily increased for decades until 1963. Since 1963,

the enrollment has dropped 20%, 20% in five years.

Private colleges educated 34% of our students ten years ago, today it is

22%. The result is an immediate, sometimes intolerable burden on the taxpayer,

who must then provide many more public facilities, teachers and administrators.

Consequently, I recommend either a legislative or executive committee be

established and funded to determine the impact the decline of private schools

will have on the taxpayer and to recommend alternate courses for State action.

E. Certain school districts face peculiar circumstances such as

loss of tax base or a rapidly growing student enrollment which outstrips the

tax base. Therefore, to tailor the assistance to the need, consideration

should be given to enlarging the category of special aid to school districts

encountering unusual problems beyond their control.

F. Teacher retirement benefits have always been a weak spot. To

solve the pressing needs of the present and to meet the inflation and changing

conditions of the future, a plan for improvement has been recommended by the

Legislative Commission on Public Employee Retirement Systems with approval by

State teachers' organizations. I endorse that plan and request its early

enactment.

am dedicated to the quality of education and firmly committed to seeing

our young people profit by it. My budget message shall reflect my best judgment

on how we can strike the proper. balance between the desirable and the doable.

The fifth issue Minnesotans are putting before this Legislature will be a
true test of government's problem solving ability. If we honestly commit
ourselves to solving problems, we cannot weasel out of the tough ones.
The gap between our performance and our potential in securing the health
and safety of our people is a cruel and intolerable contradiction. We know more and more about the ugly effects of drug abuse and yet last
year, examinations by the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension on suspected narcotics
violations were up 160% over 1967.
We know more about highway safety and last year we set a new record in
highway deaths. We know more about family medicine but have fewer family doctors.
The time is long overdue for this State to commit itself to a broadscale
program to secure the health and safety of our people. Therefore, I ask you to
consider:
A. The creation of a central state source to collect and disseminate information for drug education. Such a central agency would also coordinate
and integrate the volunteer activities of several interested disciplines
pharmacy, pharmacology, medicine, law, sociology, psychology.
B. I strongly urge action to provide more general medical practitioners
in Minnesota. C. I ask the Higher Education Coordinating Commission to explore the
possibility of expanding programs to train paramedical personnel in our junior
colleges and vocational technical schools.
We must continue to move forward in our efforts to care for the retarded in the context of his own community. During the 1967-68 biennium, there was an increase of 125% in the number of mentally retarded served by day care centers. In my budget message I shall strongly recommend a greatly expanded appropriation for day care centers and sheltered workshops. In addition, in order that we may move effectively in the direction of community care for the mentally retarded, I also request this Legislature require all school districts to conduct a census of all school age children
E. My budget message will reflect my concern for the care of the mentally ill in our institutions, as well as stronger support for mental health centers.
F. I will also recommend an increased appropriation for the proper care of the blind and the deaf.
A source of constant heartache to me is our daily death toll on the highways. It is particularly distressing when you know it is avoidable. Last year we actually reduced our fatality rate when based on the number of cars on the road and miles traveled. But we also set an all-time high in deaths. In order to end the carnage on our roads, we must:
G. Expand the services of the Commission on Alcohol Problems by a substantially increased appropriation. With alcohol involved in 60% of the fatal accidents, we shall never make significant improvements in highway safety without attacking the alcohol problem.
H. Require all drivers to submit to an alcohol test when involved in a fatal accident.
I. Raise penalties for driving while intoxicated.

J. Expand number and jurisdiction of State Highway Patrol. The presence of a marked car increases the blood pressure and good judgment of every driver.
K. Require annual motor vehicle inspection. L. Require physical examination upon renewal of a driver's license.
No nation, no state can call itself humane if it does not use the resources within its power to put an end to human misery. 

Nor can a people claim for themselves a measure of greatness if they cannot build cities which serve man, cities which facilitate his commerce, elevate his culture and house his family. Minnesota can build great cities.
Of all the large metropolitan areas in the country, our seven-county area is one of the finest.
Its environment one of the most free from pollution, Its people one of the most highly educated, Its culture one of the most diverse, Its civic leadership one of the most productive. With such a foundation, we have no reason not to develop the outstanding metropolitan area in the country. But there is much to be done much to be done this Session. The urgency is real. By the year 2000, the population of the seven-county area will more than double. What you decide this Session will have a profound effect on whether at the turn of the century our cities will be disintegrating or thriving. Last Session, you created a Metropolitan Council whose potential to bring order to the urban scene has drawn international attention. During this Session, we must make the Metropolitan Council a viable instrument for problem solving. I urge your thorough consideration of:
A. Granting the Metropolitan Council operating authority over sewage treatment facilities. This item has the highest priority.
B. Making the Transit Commission accountable to the Metropolitan Council.
C. Strengthening the Metropolitan Council's voice in highway planning. D. Placing in the Metropolitan Council powers to effectively plan for and oversee the disposal of solid waste. E. Giving the Metropolitan Council planning and operating authority over a metropolitan zoo. Our Twin City area should be completely major league in its educational and recreational possibilities. Furthermore, it is incumbent upon us to whom falls the burden of decisionmaking to lift our sights beyond tomorrow. As we have been taught by the prophets of old, "Where there is no vision, the people perish." Especially is that fate sealed if we take no steps to prevent 90% of our population from living on 1% of the land. Entirely new cities must be built. Minnesota is already a frontrunner in the new cities concept. There is generous support of the Experimental City project which has now been renamed "The Minnesota City." You will be asked to support this project during this Session. I ask you to give it your serious attention. 

Another problem of great concern to our people is jobs. "Of all the ways society serves the individual, few are more meaningful than to provide him with a decent job. ,,1 And a safe job. We score well in providing decent jobs. In fact, we anticipate that when official figures for 1968 are published, for the first time in over 25 years Minnesotans' personal income will meet or exceed the national average. However, we have been tragically weak in developing safe jobs. Despite our appalling number of disabling injuries from auto accidents, more people are disabled at work than on the road. I give my wholehearted support to improving occupational safety. We should:
A. Increase the number of safety inspectors and their appropriation for travel.
B. Stiffen the penalties for violations of safety regulations from a misdemeanor to a gross misdemeanor.
c. Provide a procedure for public participation in the formulation
of safety standards. But we need to do more than improve the safety in jobs. We need to
continue to generate additional job opportunities. Therefore, we must encourage economic development throughout the entire state.
Please consider five important suggestions which can help us expand economic opportunity:
D. Substantially increase our financial commitment to both industrial and tourism regional programs. The record setting economic growth of the State over the past two years is eloquent testimony to the potential of regional problem solving. In the last two years, there was a 22% increase in tourism.
The impact of our Rural Renaissance Program is already paying dividends in our communities. For example, comparing September, 1968, nonagricultural employment with September, 1966, communities around the State show significant increases: Thief River Falls - 39%, Marshall - 27%, Little Falls - 15%, Crookston - 13%, Owatonna - 11%, and WilLmar - 10%.
E. Adopt a uniform Monday holiday law, with significant personal,
as well as economic advantages. I F. Remove the present 5¢ per capita limit that a county can spend
for promotional purposes.
G. Remove the five-year spread and the One Hundred Million Dollar bonding program adopted last Session to allow us to accelerate the construction
of safer roads. Particularly is this desirable in view of the federal cutback of Sixty-two Million Dollars which has disrupted our highway planning.
H. Intensify our agricultural development. The fate of the State is
bound up on the fate of the farmer and the farmer is in trouble. During the past ten years the farmer's labor costs have risen
46%, his machinery costs 30%, his debt interest 59% and the parity ratio I dropped to 74%, the lowest rate since the depression.
Granted, States' powers in agricultural policy and price supports
are severely limited. But I am convinced there is a role states can play. I shall call in April a Governor's Farm Conference so farmers can help us search
out state-based agricultural efforts. The Governor's Conference on Rural I Community Development and the Governor's Conference on Tourism were the authors
of several proposals in this speech. I look forward to the brainstorming in
April. These eight proposals should greatly increase our ability to author decent
and safe jobs. 
Neither can we overlook a topic of special significance to me, to you, and to all Minnesotans. It is an issue which intimately affects every man and
directly tests our basic principles. It is the question of human rights.
Two years ago we recognized the vital importance of this concern and you
created the nation's first Department of Human Rights. You passed a fair
housing law. The Department formed almost 50 local human rights councils
and handled over 450 cases of discrimination. We worked to actively invite
minority families to Minnesota's vacation spots, I issued the first Executive
Order banning discrimination in State business, the Department of Employment
Security put local offices in Negro neighborhoods and on Indian reservations,
and 36,000 permanent and temporary summer jobs for youth were found in 1968.
Those are good strides but not good enough. I have already assigned a man to start recruiting summer job opportunities for youth for the summer of
1969.
A. Furthermore, I urge the creation and funding of a Governor's
Councilor Committee on Youth Opportunity within the Division of Social
Services, with a full time director to work with the President's Council on Youth Opportunity at the State level, to initiate and coordinate a truly
comprehensive annual summer program for disadvantaged Minnesota youth in such
areas as employment, education, cultural endeavors and recreation involving
all of State Government, and enlisting the aid of local government, industry I and private groups.
B. In addition, in my budget message I shall recommend expanding
the capabilities of the Department of Human Rights through significantly
increased appropriations.
This governmental effort, coupled with private actions and a personal I

- 19 -
resolve, can help maintain Minnesota's national leadership in securing individual equality.

Many proposals have been made in this speech. Many more shall come in

special messages and informal conferences. However, in order to bring focus

to the mass of legislation we will consider in the next five months, I want to

underscore 11 areas where I feel legislation is a must if we are to convince

people of the governmental institution's ability to respond to change.

1. Major crime legislation.

2. Major reorganization legislation.

3. Minnesota's Crystal Waters Program.

4. Financial relief for Senior Citizens.

There are few subjects on which I receive as much mail as on the

sincere complaints of Senior Citizens that they cannot afford to stay in their

own homes. In over 20 hearings conducted around the State by the Governor's

Council on Aging, this fact was emphasized. The special real estate tax relief

intended for Senior Citizens last Session was largely lost. We must, in this

Session, make it effectual.

5. Undergirding quality education.

6. Forceful highway and occupational safety legislation.

7. Expanded powers for the Metropolitan Council.

8. Creation of a drug education center and a narcotics enforcement

division.

9. Expanded community care for the mentally retarded and mentally

10. Expanded job opportunities.

- 20 -
11. A constitutional amendment to lower the voting age. The reasons to do so are well known and will be drawn to your attention by a bipartisan group of young people called the Minnesota Coalition for Lowering the Voting Age. I was pleased last week to have a visit with this exciting group of young people and I enthusiastically support their efforts. I know you will enjoy working with them.
It is time to quit preaching at the young to become interested while blocking them from becoming involved. Let us let them in.


This is a program that will enable us to step out boldly and creatively
in Phase II of the Decade of Decision. These are the years that will determine if states can solve problems, if people can once again believe in the institution of government.
And I want more than anything else to reaffirm the State's ability to solve problems and to rebuild our people's trust in that ability. I seek no higher honor than to be called simply a problem solver.
sincerely look forward to the next five months when we shall prove to the people that we can meet the problems we have inherited from the past. We can tackle the problems of the present and we will earnestly seek to anticipate and avoid the problems of the future.
might add, perhaps I would not be so sure of government's ability if I did not see the determination, judgment and imagination reflected in this Chamber. To those of you who come to your desk for the first time, Congratulations on having been chosen to represent many Minnesotans and best wishes in

this serious but stimulating responsibility.
To all of you, my door is open. I welcome your frequent visits, for our close cooperation will be most necessary.
would be remiss if I did not also say thank you to the people of Minnesota. I am sincerely grateful for the tremendous degree of citizen participation on many boards, councils, task forces, study groups and commissions. Of the hundreds of people I have asked to serve, rarely has anyone declined.
Thanks also should go to all the good people of our State who have contributed to making Minnesota second in the nation as the Quality of Life State. We are justly proud of that achievement.
In 1969, "The problems never looked tougher and the prospects never looked brighter and anyone who isn't stirred by both those statements is frankly too tired to be of much use to us in the days ahead."l
This is a time of opportunity, not despair. A time of challenge, not defeat. In the words of William Faulkner when he accepted the Nobel Peace Prize for Literature:
"I decline to accept the end of man. I believe that man will not merely endure, he will prevail. He is immortal not because he alone among the creatures has an inexhaustible voice, but because he has a soul, a spirit capable of compassion, of sacrifice and endurance."