Distinguished guests, distinguished members of the Legislature, thanks for the opportunity to report to you and the good people of Minnesota on the condition of our State. Our State is awesome. It remains one of the best in the country. But, as Bob Dylan wrote, "The times they are a changin'." We're in a new kind of war - started by sucker-punching cowards. The battle's here, on our shores, and it undermines our sense of security. We're in a new kind of economy. Capital investments, ideas and data are now flung around the world with a click of a mouse. And, we've got a new kind of state budget: it's terrible. Our freeways are clogged. Moms and dads are always in a time vice - between work and family. Our schools seem to be in constant crisis. Health care costs are eating our paychecks and government budgets alive. Our prisons are overflowing. Big parts of rural Minnesota are being left behind. Our beautiful Minnesota environment is under increasing stress. And, we've got more people in need and not enough resources to help them. And the beat goes on. These challenges are not the result of a lack of caring or lack of government spending. This state's spending doubled in just the last ten years. We're one of the highest taxed, highest spending states in the nation. Yet, even with government spending more and more and more, our momentum and quality of life have stalled out. We're in a financial crisis - the likes of which Minnesota has never seen. The largest budget deficit in the history of the State - times two or three - is staring us in the face. It's huge. It's mean. It's ugly. It's the Incredible Hulk of budget deficits. And it could get worse. A prolonged war with Iraq, an economic downturn or another major act of terrorism will worsen the deficit. We need to come together, as leaders and as Minnesotans, on a plan to cut the Goliath down to size and then build a brighter future. The Minnesota our parents and grandparents knew is a fond memory for many of us. But we can't take the same path as the generations that preceded us - it doesn't exist anymore. We need to reinvent Minnesota for our children and grandchildren. We can still rely on our great Minnesota principles and values as our compass. But we need to lead boldly and chart our own course to a new "Good Life in Minnesota." As governor, that's what I am going to do. 


As President Bush reminded us after the Columbia tragedy, great endeavors are never without great risk.
These days demand great courage and sacrifice from us all. This crisis will be only the most recent chapter in Minnesota's history of courage.
Last week at Camp Ripley and this week at the Marine Corps Reserve Center in Minneapolis, I had the privilege of thanking and helping to send off more brave men and women leaving their families to serve our country in the war on terror.
Many will be gone for a year or more. Many leave behind confused and distraught young children. I saw a heartbroken, sobbing four year old desperately clinging to the knee of her daddy, pleading with him not go. I tried to tell her that her daddy was a hero; that he was keeping us all safe; and that we loved him, too.
They go because it's their duty. They go because they understand commitment to principle. They go because they understand the need to sacrifice in times of crisis and peril.
Minnesotans have courage.
Today we have two very special guests with us. They're Harold "Snuff" Kervers and Alf Larson. They're survivors of the Bataan Death March, where 16,000 U.S. and Filipino soldiers died as they were forced to march without food and water to a Japanese prison camp. It was one of the most horrific chapters of the Second World War.
I met these patriots recently at a reception in honor of Alf's service to our country. One of Alf's friends heard about his story only after Alf reluctantly shared it in his eighties - after keeping it to himself for most of his life.
Minnesotans have courage.
They understand commitment to principle and the need to sacrifice in times of crisis. Help me thank these two remarkable Minnesotans.
If we go back 140 years, there occurred one of the greatest moments in Minnesota's history of courage.
On the very day Fort Sumter was fired upon and the Civil War began, our second governor, Alexander Ramsey, happened to be in Washington D.C. When he heard the news, he went immediately to the White House and pledged Minnesota's militia to President Lincoln. That militia was the first state unit committed to the war effort for the Union - the Minnesota 1st Voluntary Infantry Division - or the "Minnesota 1st" as they became known.
Just a short time later, the unit played perhaps the pivotal role of the entire war during the Battle of Gettysburg.
During the battle, a force of a thousand Confederate soldiers charged the middle of the Union army's lines in an effort to split them in two. Union General Hancock ordered Minnesota's unit to charge out and meet the attack - even though they were outnumbered 20 to 1.
He said this later about Minnesota's heroes:
"I ordered the men to charge because I saw I must gain five minutes time. Reinforcements were coming on the run, but I knew before they could reach the threatened point, the Confederates, unless checked, would seize the position. The charge was necessary. I was glad to find such a gallant body of men willing to make the terrible sacrifice."
Eighty-two percent of the Minnesota 1st fell in those five minutes, the largest percentage loss of life of ANY unit during ANY engagement of the war. Had General Lee succeeded in that charge and that battle, the tide of the war could have turned. In their five minutes of courage and ultimate sacrifice, the Minnesota 1st changed the course of history and this nation.
Courage and sacrifice is not limited to those in uniform.
It's on display in our homes, neighborhoods, charities, places of worship, and businesses every day and in every town across this Great State.
Yes. Minnesotans have courage.
We understand commitment to principle and the need to sacrifice in times of crisis.
And we need that now. We have our duty to perform. Let's get at it.


Our work starts with solving the State's budget crisis. It's job one, two, three and maybe four.
The deficit we face is caused by spending too much, not by taxing too little.
The revenues coming into the State are projected to grow by 6.6 percent, which is a normal level in Minnesota's modern history. What's out of control is our government spending. Unless we change things, our state budget is expected to grow by 14.4 percent during the upcoming biennium.
I don't know many Minnesotans whose paychecks are growing by 14.4 percent.
This isn't brain surgery, folks. The State is simply spending more than it is taking in. And now we need to do what any Minnesota family who faces a financial challenge would do - sit down together at the kitchen table and figure it out.
Families can't raise taxes to get out of a jam -- and we won't either.
People will say reductions in funding for government programs are an intolerable sacrifice or that we're sending our state back to the Stone Age.
What they won't tell you is that the budget we'll be submitting will actually increase the overall level of state government spending and that this will be the largest budget in Minnesota history.
And, they won't tell you that even after the cuts, we'll remain one of the biggest government spending states in the nation.
When the protests come, and they'll come loudly and often, I hope you'll help me share this message:
We're at war. Our economy is in deep trouble. Thousands and thousands of our fellow Minnesotans have lost their jobs. The sacrifices we'll be asking government to make are no different than the sacrifices families, businesses, workers and all organizations across this State are already making every single day.
And one more thing: the difficulties we face and the cuts we'll be making are nothing -- they are nothing -- compared to the sacrifices made by the generations before us or the sacrifices the men and women of our armed forces are making today.
We spent our way into this crisis. We're not going to tax our way out of it.
For some, that's an outrageous position. The people of Minnesota don't think so. As I travel around this great state, people agree that we shouldn't raise taxes.
Solving our budget deficit without raising taxes should not be a partisan issue.
Look to our east. The Governors of Wisconsin and Michigan -- who are Democrats -- have said they will not raise taxes. They have joined with their legislative leaders to make a bipartisan commitment to solve their deficits without new taxes.
We should have a united front against the deficit in Minnesota. Today, I'm asking legislators from both parties to join with me and most Minnesotans to protect hardworking Minnesota families from having government take even more from their paychecks.

Our budget and our agenda is not just about balancing the books. It'll also be about re-tooling, reforming and improving government so we reinvigorate our quality of life. I'm not interested in managing government. I want to change it.
Behind me is a portrait of Abraham Lincoln. When he took office, he set two main goals. First, preserve the Union. And second, build the transcontinental railroad.
Now, the fans of the Northstar Commuter rail project shouldn't get overly excited about this reference. The point here is much broader.
Facing the greatest crisis in this nation's history, Lincoln knew securing the present was not enough. He had a vision and agenda for building the future beyond the immediate crisis.

We can't just solve the budget crisis. We also need to get about the business of re-building Minnesota's future.
The good news is that if we make the tough calls now, our budget situation is going to come around within three years. Better days will come if - if - we lead now.
And while we don't have much new money to spend, we do have the power to create new and much more effective ways to spend the money we do have.

The education of our children and grandchildren is one of our highest duties.
It wasn't that long ago that Minnesota was the epicenter of innovation in education. If something big and good was happening in education reform, it was happening here.
We still have a great education system, but we've become complacent and we're treading water. We need to reclaim our place as the best education innovators in the country.
Here's what we need to do to get started:
1. Get back to the core mission.
The main thing is to keep the main thing the main thing. Educating children and improving student learning is the main thing. Not "feel good" curriculum. Not focusing on attitudes instead of academics. We're going to start this effort to refocus by renaming the Department of Children, Families and Learning the Minnesota Department of Education.
2. School accountability begins with parents.
Parents need to be more accountable. Parents must do their part. Minnesota moms and dads, we need to make sure our children get a good night's rest before school, and come to school fed and ready to learn.
When they're at school, children need to behave and it's the parent's job to help ensure behavioral problems don't continue. And when our children return home, both they and their parents need to understand that homework and tutoring by parents is more important than American Idol, WWE, DVD's or getting to the next level on the Grand Theft Auto video game.
As working parents with two young children, Mary and I know how challenging this can be. The First Lady, who is with us here today, is an extraordinary wife and mom and our family is so grateful for her.
For the parents who can't or won't answer this call, we need to find mentors, tutors and others who will.
3. The Profile of Learning needs to be abolished and replaced with something better.
Minnesota started America down the path of uniform standards for schools. But we've veered badly off track.
Our children deserve nation-leading academic standards that are clear, rigorous and focused on what students need to know. And I trust teachers to know how to help students reach those standards.
4. We need a new approach to educating our neediest children.
As good as our schools have been, we're leaving too many children behind. And the sad reality is, they tend to be poor, disabled, or children of color.
I will not stand by and allow another generation of disadvantaged children to be cast aside.
In some of our highest spending school districts, less than 1/2 the students graduate, and many who do need remedial education. That's not good enough. For these children, we need to be more creative.
My administration is committed to giving the parents of these children more options. Who is against giving poor, failing or disabled children more opportunities - and why would you be?

5. Reward great teachers.
The best and brightest students in the world need the best and brightest teachers in the world. That means paying good teachers more for excellent teaching. We need to move towards performance pay plans for school staff.
6. Create a school funding formula that is fair and understandable.
The current school funding formula is broken and too complicated.
In the coming weeks, we'll name a panel of school finance experts and interested citizens to begin the process of redesigning our school funding formula. After receiving their recommendations, we'll ask the Legislature to authorize demonstration projects that will allow a dozen districts to try out the new ways of funding schools. Whatever works best should be available to districts statewide.
Better schools are the ticket to opportunity and a better quality of life for future Minnesotans.

And so is a job.
We're the place that invented toasters, thermostats, water-skis and Spam. We heal the world, feed the world and sell the world pacemakers. We dug the iron ore than won two world wars. But our economy is in trouble.
We've lost 38,000 manufacturing jobs in the last four years. That's nearly all of the manufacturing jobs we gained during the entire decade of the 1990's. We're hemorrhaging the types of jobs where average Minnesotans can still make a good wage and have decent benefits.
We need a full range of job opportunities in Minnesota to sustain the quality of life for everybody. I'm sick and tired of stimulating the economies of places like Wisconsin and South Dakota with our jobs.
Here's what we need to do:
1. Do no further harm.
Taxes chew up the bottom line of job creators. We can't make a bad situation worse.
2. Create JOB Zones.
Today, there's an acute shortage of good paying jobs in Greater Minnesota.
From East Grand Forks to Hibbing to Luverne to Spring Grove, there are communities and families and small businesses that need a reason to hope - and a chance to grow jobs. Today I'm calling on the Legislature to enact my plan for JOB Zones to provide an economic adrenaline boost to the most economically challenged areas of the state.
3. Invest at home.
The State Board of Investment should invest more in Minnesota companies. Many states already have gone down this path. It's resulted in more investment and jobs in their states.
4. Build on our strengths.
It's easier to ride a wave than to create one.
When it comes to future job growth, our state's economic health hinges on human health. We're a world leader in cutting edge medical technologies. Genomics, medical devices and biotechnology offer the promise of a longer life and the opportunity for more good jobs in Minnesota.
We need to rekindle the entrepreneurial spirit of Minnesota's colleges and universities to make our state a global leader in this rapidly emerging industry.
I will lead efforts to bring the Mayo Clinic and the University of Minnesota together to make two of the nation's premier providers strong partners in developing the treatments, devices and medicines that will revolutionize medical care within a decade.

It will also be a big boost to our economy.
5. Provide greater incentives for investments in new Minnesota businesses.
Once we get our heads above water with the budget, we should provide greater incentives for venture capital investment in new Minnesota companies. To build jobs, we need to be more friendly to job-creators and investment- makers or every one of us will pay the price. We need to stop the things that drive jobs away and start doing more of the things that bring jobs here to stay.

A great education and a good job don't mean much if we're not safe.
The safety of our citizens is government's first duty. We're in a global war against terrorism, and we need to keep our guard up by taking several actions:
1. Keep track of foreign visitors by putting their visa expiration dates right on their drivers licenses.
We shouldn't give a four-year driver's license - Minnesota's most important identity document - to people who may only legally be in this country for a few weeks. This common sense legislation passed the House with a majority of Republicans and Democrats voting for it. Today, I'm calling on the Senate to quickly embrace this important prevention tool that our law enforcement community has endorsed.
2. Help authorities communicate in time of crisis.
The men and women who risk their lives responding to an emergency need to be able to talk to each other. If disaster strikes here, many of the first responders have radios that don't allow them to talk to each other. This is especially true in Greater Minnesota. It's a problem that will cost lives in the event of a real emergency.
I will use federal terrorism dollars to accelerate Minnesota's efforts to allow First Responders to communicate.
3. Share information with local and federal authorities.
One of the lessons of September 11th was that the failure of agencies to share information made us more vulnerable. We won't repeat that mistake in Minnesota. One of our priorities will be to complete the work of linking our criminal justice systems to protect the lives of Minnesotans.
4. Serve crime victims better.
Victims of crime are now poorly served by uncoordinated programs that were designed to help them. We're going to pull together crime victim and anti-violence efforts into a new Office of Justice Programs to provide a seamless system of services.

In addition to keeping people safe, we need to improve the ability of Minnesotans to travel.
We need to change the culture and the approach to building Minnesota's transportation infrastructure. Our projects take too long, cost too much, and don't move enough people and goods from point A to Point B. This burdens our economy and compromises our quality of life.
MNDOT needs a shake up, and I don't know a better shaker than Lieutenant Governor Carol Molnau. She'll find waste and end it. She'll locate red tape and cut it. She'll find money to save and reinvest it.
We will move our transportation system forward.

Health care is at the same time Minnesota's costliest problem and its greatest opportunity for change. Rising health care costs are fueling a big part of our budget deficit and they're squeezing the budgets of workers, employers, and families in a very painful way. If any state can solve this problem, it's Minnesota.
Former U.S. Senator Dave Durenberger has agreed to lead a Blue Ribbon Task Force of Minnesotans to help us chart a course for the future of health and health care in Minnesota. This task force will provide Minnesotans with a long range cost control strategy to make health care more affordable. I expect this task force to finish its work within the next eight months.

With Senator Durenburger's leadership, I'm confident this effort will succeed.
Kids, jobs, public safety, transportation and health. Some will ask if we can afford to move forward with these new initiatives. We can't afford not to.

There's a story I've heard about John F. Kennedy.
In 1961, President Kennedy said: "...this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon, and return him safely to the earth."
The story goes, he was touring the Space Center in Florida a short time later. At one point during the tour, the President visited with a janitor. The young president said to the man, "Well, sir, what do you do here at the Space Center?" Without hesitating, the man answered, "I'm putting a man on the moon by the end of this decade, Mr. President."
Vision is a powerful thing. It motivates people because it connects their individual contribution, however small, to a great and noble purpose.
Today I want to issue a call to citizenship and service to every Minnesotan who hears my voice. Minnesota needs you -- now.
I got a letter recently from Phyllis Bakke of Northfield, who has joined us today.
Without commenting on her age, let me just say she's seen many governors come and go in her lifetime. She wrote to encourage me. When she read about the deficit, she did a simple thing. She sent me a dollar. This dollar.
I'm sure she's sent a lot of dollars to the Minnesota Treasury during her life. But she wanted me to know, and wants us all to know, she's going the extra mile for the state she loves. I'm going to keep Phyllis' dollar to remind me that addressing a meaningful challenge begins with one small step. And you know what Phyllis? When we've met the challenge and solved this crisis, I'm going to give you your dollar back.
Thank you for your Minnesota spirit of giving and sacrifice.
In a time so dominated by big government, big business, big labor and big media, perhaps we have lost our understanding of the role citizens can play.
The Minnesota Time magazine celebrated three decades ago was not the product of politicians, CEOs or talk radio. It was created by citizens who reinvented health care, education, and community.
As Minnesota approaches our 150th Birthday, we need to rediscover that civic service that made us great.
Perhaps we've all become too comfortable, too entitled, too quick to rely on government and too slow to take responsibility ourselves. We face an unprecedented global and financial crisis. Perhaps that is the privilege of our problem: to hear our own call to arms, our own call to service, our own call to sacrifice and our own call to leadership.
I ask you to serve wherever your conscience directs and your circumstances permit.
Shut off the TV and the computer and find somebody who needs your attention.
Learn about another culture and get to know and trust someone different than you.
Buy something on East Lake Street rather than on EBay.
Instead of going to a "feel good" movie, do something good and feel the real thing.
I want to make a special call to the citizenship of those who have chosen the serving professions. The teachers, nurses and doctors. The ministers, social workers, tutors, mentors, and public employees. Thanks for what you do.
We need you to help solve this challenge. For now, the answer can't be more money. But you can help a great deal because I know you have ideas on how to reform your professions from the inside out and how to revolutionize the way we heal, teach and build character. We need you and ask for your help.

One of my first visits after the election was to the Department of Public Safety. A supervisor there pulled me aside and said, "Governor: the key is not doing more with less. It's doing the right things well." That was Brian Lamb, my new Commissioner of Administration. He summed up what must become our common passion and vision.
And as Minnesotans have done throughout our history, we should seek strength beyond ourselves.
Isaiah wrote:
"Even youths grow tired and weary, and young men stumble and fall; but those who hope in God will renew their strength. They will soar on wings like eagles; they will run and not grow weary, they will walk and not be faint."
In that spirit and hope, and in the great heritage of service and sacrifice that is Minnesota, let us walk together. Then let us run. And one day soon, even soar.
May God bless you and may God continue to bless the great State of Minnesota."Why do we live here in Minnesota?" It's been 25 below, it seems like we only see the sun for a few hours during winter days, and we spend a lot of time shoveling snow. There are other places to live. Why do we live here?
That's the question I've been asking Minnesotans lately, and I've heard many different answers.
Some people told me they love being able to go "up north, to the cabin." Others said they love our great outdoors. Good schools. Less crime than other places. The value of being near family. Others say they love the change of seasons and all the fun things to do... like ice fishing.
I did hear a common theme from everyone: There's a special Minnesota spirit, and that's the reason we love our state.
Perhaps the greatest examples of our Minnesota spirit are the brave Minnesotans who serve in the United States Military.
Some of these men and women have made the ultimate sacrifice.
Seated in the gallery are Caroline and Larry Erickson and Karen and Arland Panchot, whose sons Brian Hellerman and Dale Panchot were two Minnesota soldiers who gave their lives in Iraq. Two other Minnesota soldiers, Ed Herrgott and Patrick Dorff, also lost their lives in combat in Iraq. While so very proud of their sons, their loss pains their families deeply. To the families: Your sons' sacrifices helped make this world a better place. We're grateful to them and to all the men and women who serve. Please join me in expressing our appreciation for these brave Minnesotans.

In the last couple years, we've been tested by war, recession, layoffs, terrorism and budget deficits. But I'm here to tell you, the spirit of Minnesota is strong and so is the state of our state.
We have reason to be optimistic.
A year ago, I stood here and said Minnesota government was 4.5 billion dollars in the hole. It was devastating news.
One year later, what story does Minnesota's checkbook tell?
When the budget forecast comes out later this month, I expect it to say we've made about 4 billion dollars worth of progress towards balance, and that we've built 600 million in reserves.
And we did it without raising taxes!
We're not out of the woods yet. We still have some deficit yet to fix now and in the future. But we've made tremendous progress.
The budget was not all we did this past year.
We finally repealed the convoluted Profile of Learning! And, we're replacing it with rigorous, high-quality learning standards.
Even with a mammoth deficit, we maintained per-pupil funding for core K-12 classroom functions.
With a record number of Minnesotans overseas defending that flag and what it represents, we reinstituted the Pledge of Allegiance in our schools. It's high time we did.
We established Job Opportunity Building Zones to bring jobs and growth back to rural Minnesota.
We put the visa expiration dates of foreign visitors right on their Minnesota driver's licenses to help law enforcement fight terrorism.

We positioned Minnesota to become a world leader in the coming bioscience revolution.
We jump-started road and bridge construction with the largest infusion of funding in our history.
We once again made work the focus of welfare reform.
We promoted justice and fairness by enacting lawsuit reform.
We enhanced the environmental protection of our land, air and water, including reaching a one billion dollar agreement to clean up old coal plants. The agreement will yield the most significant reduction in emissions since the federal Clean Air Act.
And remember, we did all this without raising taxes!
But as we contend for Minnesota's share of the future, we've not yet begun to fight.
The future is coming at us faster than it ever has. It's a tidal wave of change. If we don't get on top of it and ride it, it will drown us. We need to prepare Minnesota to take advantage of the change that's coming. The global economy is impacting our Minnesota economy with all the subtlety of a deploying airbag.
My passion as Governor is this: I want Minnesota to contend for its share of the future right now, and I want Minnesota to face its challenges and win.
To do that, we'll need to be at the top of our game. We're not going to carry the day on the size of our population and certainly not because of our weather.

We do need to be more competitive on things like taxes, regulations and health insurance costs, but we're never going to be a "bargain basement" state that can low-ball China or Mexico or even lots of other states on price. That's not our tradition in Minnesota, it's not our culture and it's not our future.
But that means to compete, we need to be quicker, faster, smarter, more energetic, more creative, more nimble, and more strategic than other states and our international competitors.
I'm excited about the challenge, and hope you are too. I want to develop every option, push every button, and explore every idea I can to get us another inch closer to being great.
Some think we can secure Minnesota's future just by adding more money to our past approaches.
Others think that all we need to do is cut taxes, regulations, and other government demands.
Government is not the answer and government is not the problem. We need to make government both leaner and more effective, and we can do both. To accomplish that, we need to do things differently.
At another time like this, FDR said:
"The country needs... the country demands bold, persistent experimentation. It is common sense to take a method and try it. If it fails, admit it frankly and move on. But above all, try something."
For starters, we need to forge a new spirit of unity and fair play in this place. We have huge challenges ahead us. We've got no energy to waste playing political splat ball.
There are three things on which we can all agree.

First, Minnesota is the most fertile place in America, not just for crops, but for ideas.
Second, Minnesota government lost its leadership edge a while ago, and we need to get it back. Good enough, isn't. We need more energy, vision and willingness to take risks.
And third, innovation and reform are the heart of who we are, the core of the Minnesota spirit.
The people in Two Harbors who invented sandpaper didn't know they were creating 3M. The people in Rochester who set up a new kind of hospital didn't know they were creating the Mayo Clinic. And I'm sure Mr. and Mrs. Hartman had no idea what they were doing when they created Sid.
Change creates new possibilities, new futures that never existed before.
The first big thing we should do is make sure no future Governor and Legislature has to face what we faced last year -- a mammoth, historic budget deficit.
Let's face it. Government is hard-wired to spend because people in political office get rewarded for saying "yes," not for saying "no." Disciplined decision-making usually only appears in times of crisis.
Just like families and hard-working Minnesotans, we should take steps to make sure we live within our means. Even credit cards have limits. It's a time to explore ways to prevent runaway spending by state government, such as limiting the growth of state spending to something around inflation plus population growth. Many other states have taken this step, and if it's done reasonably, it works well.
In addition, my agenda focuses on four categories: Education, Jobs, Health Care and Quality of Life.

I begin where it all begins, with education.
Minnesota has a great and proud tradition of having tremendous schools. There are many wonderful teachers and educators working hard every day to keep our schools performing well.
But we also now know that if you peel back the onion and focus on certain districts or school sites, too many children are being left behind at a time when the importance of education to Minnesotans, their families and our future has never been greater. The education debate has changed. It's no longer just about how much we spend. It's also about how we hold the system accountable for better results for our children.
For decades, Minnesota was a hotbed of education innovation and we need to get back our edge.
First, we need to tackle the sacred cow of education policy -- education finance reform. It's one of the most important things we can do. The current formula is too complex and that breeds a lack of accountability.
More importantly, we need to link the actual cost of educating a child to education funding. With standards, we know what children should learn and we can figure out how much that should cost.
The current formula is an artifact of history and political tweaking. It's become disconnected from accountability measures. It's reliance on only a per-pupil funding approach too dramatically impacts our districts with declining enrollment. We can do better.
Last year, I formed a task force on education finance reform. Their recommendations will be out soon. We're eager to hear them and work with you to develop a better school funding system for our children.

We also know that parents make or break student performance. In every way we possibly can, we need to encourage, challenge and require that parents do their job. Student to teacher ratios are important. Even more important is the ratio of time parents spend on their children's education. Any discussion about education performance or accountability should start right there.
Beyond parents, teachers are the next most important contributor to a child's education. In the gallery today is one outstanding Minnesota teacher. Mark Johnson risked his own life to save the lives of his students during the Rocori High School shooting last year. Mark, thank you for your courage and Minnesota spirit.
We proposed a series of initiatives this fall to improve education in Minnesota that include:
· Paying "super teachers" a lot more for performance; · Yanking drivers licenses from kids who skip class too often; · Providing parents and others with school report cards to
improve accountability; · Making Internet access more affordable for rural schools; and · Expanding charter schools in Minnesota and more.
The Minneapolis school district is our largest and our most challenged. I am enthusiastic about the bold moves advocated by Acting School Superintendent Dave Jennings in Minneapolis. I support his aggressive and innovative approach, and we urge the Legislature to do so as well.
It's also high time to strategically re-think the future of Higher Education in Minnesota. We need to make sure the system is structured, managed and governed in an optimal way to meet future needs. We've asked the Citizens League to lead a state-wide effort addressing the alignment and capabilities of our higher education programs.

We educate our children to prepare them for citizenship, life and to be ready for the workplace. Jobs are the glue that holds our state together.
One of the most important things we can do to grow jobs in this state is to not raise taxes. Tax increases hit job creators right where it hurts: the bottom line. If we want to compete, we need to prove to job creators we mean business on taxes.
But there's also much more we can do to make Minnesota more job-friendly.
Our current tax code contains a penalty on businesses for creating jobs and investing in Minnesota. We need to eliminate this anti-jobs tax and adopt a single factor formula for business taxes.
We need to leverage our strategic advantage in the emerging bioscience economy. I am asking you to fund, through the bonding bill, the historic new research partnership between the Mayo Clinic and the University of Minnesota. I also ask your support to enhance the bioscience zones we created last year. This is a huge opportunity and we can compete and win in this area.
Building the economy of the future also means helping Minnesota's bedrock industries find their place in the new economy. Citizens and members of my cabinet are working aggressively on ways to improve the competitiveness of our timber, mining and livestock industries. All three of these industries find themselves greatly impacted by domestic and global challenges.
The strength and vitality of our agricultural economy depends on the livestock industry, which is one of the best ways to add value to the crops we grow here. We hope you'll support our proposal to provide low-interest loans for modernization that will help farmers grow and compete.

Job creators in Minnesota need access to global markets for their products. Too many businesses have to ship through Chicago, which drives up their transportation costs. I propose that we lead efforts to have the private sector develop a large-scale regional distribution center for cargo.
We're also creating a one-stop shop for job providers to untangle red tape. We're improving the permitting process. We're streamlining technology so that more government services can be provided online. And, in a few weeks, we'll be proposing a major overhaul of our tourism marketing efforts.
As the national economy recovers, these steps and others will put Minnesota in a position to retain good jobs and compete for the jobs of the future.
Next I want to talk about something for which Minnesota is world famous: our health care and the health of our people. But even we have a major problem.
Medical costs and insurance premium increases are a tourniquet that is squeezing off the blood supply to every family, business and government budget in Minnesota. We need to act before these costs permanently damage our quality of life and our ability to compete.
You shouldn't have to get on a bus to get a fair deal on prescription medicines. You should just have to get online.
Last Friday was a historic day in Minnesota. With a click of a mouse, we became the first state in the union to give our citizens access to safe, effective and less expensive prescription drugs from Canada.
Powerful forces are gathering against this initiative. I need your support to stay the course. This is not the final answer to medical costs, but it will help.

As our population ages, we also need to ensure we have the best nursing homes and long-term care for our parents, grandparents, and soon enough, ourselves. We'll be announcing a full long-term care reform package in the coming weeks. But I'm asking the Commissioner of Health to implement the first step. We want to create a report card that can be used by consumers to evaluate the quality of care at each of Minnesota's nursing homes. We owe it to our seniors to have the best possible care available ­ and that starts with accountability.
Tomorrow, we'll be announcing the principles that will guide the next generation of bold health care reform in Minnesota. The Citizens Forum on Health Care Costs, led by Senator Dave Durenberger, will issue its recommendations.
Our approach will include leveraging the purchasing power of the state and other partners to force health care providers to use best practices and deliver higher quality results.
I'm also excited about several good ideas proposed by Representative Bradley, Senator Berglin, and others.
Now, I want to talk about our quality of life.
We love it here, but not everybody appreciates our Minnesota way of life. If we're going to convince talented, innovative people to stay here, invest here, and relocate here, we've got to have plenty of live bait on the hook. That will be a big part of whether we succeed in the new economy.
We need to continue to improve our quality of life and here's what I propose.
We absolutely need to improve public safety. Nothing much matters if you don't feel safe. The disappearance of Dru Sjodin is the latest mile marker along a trail of tragedy that is traveled far too often. Those tragedies threaten to undermine our sense of safety.

In order to maintain Minnesota nice for everybody else, we need to get Minnesota tough on criminals.
In my bonding proposal, I've allocated funding for 875 new Minnesota prison beds, one of the largest prisons expansions in our history.
For our most dangerous sex offenders, we need to keep them locked up longer. I also ask you to approve my comprehensive plan to bolster the system of civil commitment for those who should never be released into the community. For those who are required to be released, I ask for your support for our proposal to make those criminals wear GPS monitoring devices for more intensive supervision of such offenders.
It's time to give the people the chance to speak on the death penalty for those who commit unspeakable crimes, such as the murder of a child. The punishment needs to fit the crime. We ask that you let the people of Minnesota be heard on this issue by putting it on the ballot.
We also need to make our travel more safe by lowering the limit for drunk driving in Minnesota to the .08 standard. That change is overdue.
In addition to public safety, Minnesotans value our natural resources.
Minnesota's farmers are the original conservationists, because the land and water are their livelihood and their heritage. With their help, I know we can do a better job of protecting Minnesota's great outdoors. That's why I've proposed that we set aside 100,000 acres of marginal farm land to act as buffer strips between runoff and some of our most environmentally sensitive waterways, to create habitat and improve water quality. Let's move forward with this initiative.

In Minnesota, hunting and fishing aren't just hobbies, they're a constitutionally-protected way of life. We're bringing a new level of accountability to the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
We're trying to better serve the men and women who pay the bills for wildlife and habitat conservation. We've already taken action to consolidate the DNR's four fish and wildlife divisions into one, and to make sure that fish, wildlife and conservation are the agency's top priorities. We'll also continue with efforts to maintain and improve that focus.
After a decade of neglect and increased traffic congestion, in 2003 we made unprecedented progress in new and refurbished roads and bridges. Lt. Governor Carol Molnau's outstanding work at Mn/DOT financed the largest cash infusion in Minnesota history, jumpstarting many delayed projects.
We're pushing ahead with HOT lane and FAST lane projects to both expand capacity and finance the construction of new lanes. We're also working hard on local bridges and roads.
We also need to move ahead with more effective transit.
My bonding proposal contains preliminary funding for the Northstar commuter line, through one of the nation's fastest growing and most congested corridors. After rigorous review, this proposal has received support from President Bush, Senator Coleman, Congressmen Kennedy and Oberstar and many others. I also propose funding for a high-speed bus line following Cedar Avenue in the South metro.
We need to end chronic homelessness in Minnesota in the next ten years. We've developed a business plan to bring together the available public and private sector resources and expertise to tackle this problem once and for all, and we hope you'll help.

And I have one last issue that is very much on the minds of Minnesotans: gambling. I opposed the expansion of gambling in the past. However, we need to recognize that times have changed. The compacts negotiated with the American Indian tribes almost fifteen years ago do not reflect current circumstances ­ and we need to address the issue.
My preference is to keep gaming within its current contours, but we need to explore a better deal for Minnesotans, and that's what we're going to do.
This past year, Minnesota lost its head coach, Herb Brooks. During this NHL All Star week, he is being honored for all his contributions to the State of Hockey and America. He was a regular guy from the Eastside who stepped onto the world stage to face the toughest of opponents.
Herb's life is a model of the Minnesota spirit, the spirit of confidence in the face of incredible challenges. He understood that great challenges demand the best from within us.
We need to listen to Herb's locker room advice: This is our time, this is our moment.
Herb's son Dan is with us in the gallery. Dan, on behalf of us all, thanks for keeping your Dad's spirit alive.
But the Minnesota spirit is about more than tough-minded hockey coaches or military heroes, or special teachers. It's about all of us.
It's the spirit that makes us dance in the snow near castles made of ice.
It's the spirit of our rural neighbors who show up to harvest a friend's corn when they hear he's been hurt or sick.

It's the spirit that brings out volunteers for countless youth soccer teams, charity walks, food shelf collections, and mentoring programs. It's the spirit that raises an army of friends to walk the frozen, snow-covered roads and ditches of Polk County in search of a missing friend. And, it's that spirit that has brought generations of leaders to this historic room to serve. The Minnesota spirit. It's our legacy. It's our tradition. It's our future. It's made us different. It's made us great. And that's why we're here. Thank you and may God bless you. And may God continue to bless the great state of Minnesota.At 1:00 this morning, a dozen huge garage doors behind me flew open and this facility came alive as more than 15,000 blood and tissue samples began arriving from across the country and around the world. They're unloaded, processed and prepared for analysis before noon! That happens every day here because the Mayo organization of Rochester, Minnesota, does it better and faster than any place on the planet. But, 19 months ago, this building was empty and dark. The company that had built it just a few years earlier at great cost, moved its business and over 800 good jobs out of the country. It was a major blow to the Rochester area and the entire state. Today, almost 700 jobs have returned with more on the way! It's a great Minnesota comeback story. So, what can we learn from it? It tells us that Minnesota needs to be a global competitor. 
 
It reminds us that excellence matters and has a magnetic impact. It tells us again that science and technology are really important in the modern economy. It reinforces the importance of doing things fast. It again shows us the incredible value of an educated, innovative and productive workforce. It reminds us of the importance of public-private partnerships. This site was enrolled in our JOBZ program the very first day the program became available. And finally, it highlights the vast number of jobs that big economic engines like the Mayo Clinic produce - they're Minnesota's booster rockets. We all need to grasp the importance of the Rochester model. They're a successful global competitor. Why? Because they have seamlessly integrated science, technology, infrastructure, entrepreneurship, a partnering role for government, and lots and lots of hard work. Global competitiveness is Minnesota's strategic objective. We have lots of work to do to get us there. 
 
We've faced a lot of challenges the recession, the war, the ongoing threat of terrorism. But despite all that, Minnesota has tackled some tough problems and together, we've made progress. When I became Governor, Minnesota had a mammoth $4.5 billion budget deficit and zero reserves. We'll end the current budget cycle with the books balanced and our reserve and cash flow accounts restored. For sure, more budget work needs to be done, but we've made tremendous progress. We're now requiring our students to be measured against clear and workable education standards. We've taken major steps to rebuild our roads and bridges and to protect our environment. We're the first state in the nation to launch a program to help needy seniors obtain safe and lower-cost prescription medicines from Canada. And I will continue to urge the folks in Washington to open their eyes and fully open our doors to these needed medicines. We've launched the Smart Buy purchasing alliance that will show the nation how the health care market can be transformed to save costs and improve quality. 
 
Our traditional economic engines of agriculture, mining, timber and manufacturing are all displaying new signs of growth, opportunity and renewed vitality. And, through our JOBZ program and other means, we're adding jobs and growing the economy across the state. That last point is important because our progress needs to be measured by how much the private sector economy is growing, not how fast government is growing. High paying jobs are the key to our quality of life. Good jobs give our citizens the ability to take care of their families and freedom to enjoy life as they choose. The main credit for our recovery belongs to our job creators and working families, not government. This is not the first time that the importance of job growth has been emphasized in a State of the State address. You might remember that Governor Arne Carlson presented the State of the State address here in Rochester in 1994. Let me quote exactly what he said in that speech about the connection between jobs and taxes: 
"If we care about jobs, we must take a long-term pledge not to raise taxes - not now and not for years to come. Government can and must live within its means." Amen to that, Governor Carlson! 
 
A great deal has been said about my commitment not to raise taxes. It's a core value it's common sense it's important to keeping and growing jobs and it's mainstream! If you have any doubts about whether taxes are a competitive issue, look at nearby states. The Democrat Governors in the Midwestern states of Iowa, Michigan, Wisconsin and Illinois are all tackling their budget challenges while pledging not to raise taxes. They're joined by Democrat Governors in other job-seeking states such as New Mexico and Oregon. And while every state is different, Minnesota hasn't exactly been tightfisted in the last ten years. Since Governor Carlson gave his State of the State Speech here in 1994, state spending has nearly doubled. Inflation and population grew nowhere near that fast. I say again, we don't have a tax problem, we have a spending problem. Keeping a lid on taxes is not just good for the taxpayer. It's a powerful way to force government to be more accountable, set priorities and spend smarter. Let me repeat that: more accountable, set priorities and spend smarter--that's what we need to be about. But, there's much more to preparing Minnesota to become a global leader than just that, and we need to get moving. 
 
A hypercompetitive, fast-changing world demands that we approach things anew or we'll be passed by. Minnesota has more exposure to this risk than you might think. Our past success sometimes gives us a complacent attitude about change and the need to try new things. But listen to the words of visionary organizational leader Peter Drucker. He says this about the future: 
 "The things that got us here, will not get us there." The strategic mentality of too many of our public leaders today can be summed up as, "but this is the way we've always done it." We need to embrace change. We need to be bold. And, most importantly, we need to get moving. The people of Minnesota are ready for action. To the leaders in the room and to the leaders across Minnesota, I ask the question: are you ready for action? I sayLet's go Minnesota. Let's get moving. We've got work to do. It starts with setting priorities. 
 
Let me introduce you to Sara Gray. She's a senior in high school from Columbia Heights. She's 17. On the outside, she looks like a typical Minnesota teenager. She gets good grades. She was a cheerleader. She works at the Taco Bell. But she's more than that. She's a soldier in the United States military. I met her at a battalion meeting recently. I asked her why she signed up. I'll never forget her answer. She told me, "Governor, I want to serve my country. I want to give back what this country has given to me: freedom and protection." Our freedom and safety are in good hands with people like Sara and all of the men and women in our military. Join me in thanking Sara and all the people who serve. Minnesota's military members need more than our words. They need our help and support. That's why I'm asking the legislature to pass and fund additional financial incentives for service in the Minnesota National Guard as one of this session's top priorities. Next, we need to improve the way we educate our children. Minnesota has a right to be proud. But, our system of education was designed a long time ago. It needs to be updated and modernized. Last week, I announced my K12 school funding plan. It will increase average perpupil funding by 5.4 percent. 
 
My proposal offers even more incentives to school districts and unions who agree that teachers will be paid for performance, not just seniority. Minnesota is filled with many wonderful teachers, but the way we pay them is outdated. It's not geared towards accountability for results, and it doesn't treat teachers like professionals. You get what you pay for. If we pay for results, that's what we'll get. It's common sense it will help kids learn, and it will work. We also need big changes in our high schools. Too many of our 11th and 12th graders have academically "checked out." Our "Get Ready, Get Credit" initiative will give them and their parents a powerful incentive to check back in. We propose to allow every high school student to earn college credits without ever leaving their high school building. Under our proposal, a student who takes college preparatory classes and passes an exam paid for by the State, by the way will receive college credits as if the student had taken and passed the class in college. Our students will learn more, spend less time in college, and save mom and dad and themselves lots of money. They'll go further, accomplish more and do it all more quickly. 
 
Our need to improve education is not limited to K12. Higher education is not changing as rapidly as the marketplace or demographics in certain parts of the state. A prime example of that is here in Rochester. The Rochester area is projected to grow 70 percent in the next twenty five years, and its economic vitality is growing even faster. Rochester needs a strong higher education leadership structure with the responsibility and authority for decision making, and commitment to focus, coordination and planning for the future. That's why today I'm announcing a proposal for the Rochester area to take greater control over its own higher education destiny. Today, I propose that we create a university here in Rochester. The first step in this process will be to create a legal and governing entity that will be responsible for all current operations at the University Center with the exception of the technical college which will remain untouched by this proposal. The governing entity would have the option of maintaining current operations and courses or changing the focus to better serve the needs of students and the community. In the future, it might choose to become part of an existing institution of higher education. My budget announcement next week will include more than three million dollars to get this new University leadership structure started. 
 
We also need to encourage other institutions of higher learning to try new things as part of an effort to better serve their students and Minnesota. Specifically, campuses are trying to be everything to everybody. Our resources would be better utilized if we moved towards a Center of Excellence model. Winona State University President Darrell Krueger is living proof that the words "entrepreneur" and "educator" can go in the same sentence. He recently announced his retirement. As he did so, he proposed a bold new direction for Winona State. He calls his proposal "Do more, with more." He proposed increasing tuition at Winona State and using the additional resources to create a center of excellence in Winona. I'm pleased to support his exciting, innovative approach. While it may not be the right model for all our campuses, it's definitely worth a try at Winona. I'm also intrigued by the changes made in Colorado recently. They'll now send about two-thirds of their total state higher education appropriation directly to students rather than funding higher education institutions and bureaucracies. This will empower the customers students and their parents - to make choices that best suit their needs. 

I've asked Susan Heegaard, Director of HESO, to work with stakeholders to create a plan which would move Minnesota further toward funding public higher education students rather than institutions. Of course, accommodations will need to be made for high cost programs or colleges located in sparsely populated areas. I've directed her to have this plan ready for presentation during the 2006 session of the Legislature and for implementation in the 2008-09 State budget. Under this approach, colleges will need to be more accountable to their customers, more responsive to the marketplace and more accountable for results to succeed. Next, we need to make new investments that will make Minnesota more globally competitive. The list of investments to be made is long but let me focus on one as an example. Minnesota is the home of two world-leading medical research institutions located 90 miles apart. Historically, the University of Minnesota and the Mayo Clinic have been competitors. Two years ago, I was here in Rochester to announce they are now going to work together. This historic partnership will leverage the power of these two great institutions beyond what they could accomplish individually. 

The strength of their coming together will be an awesome force in the world's medical research marketplace, and it will bring great benefit to Minnesota. The partnership I announced two years ago had two key components. The first is construction of a new MayoU Genomics Lab here in Rochester. It was in my bonding bill proposal last year, and it's in my bonding bill proposal this year. I thank Speaker Sviggum and the House for passing a bonding bill last year with the project in it. I'm hoping both the House and the Senate will do the same this year. But, I want to be perfectly clear on this point: I won't sign a bonding bill this year without this project in it. The second part of my partnership plan is operating funds for research. We allocated a few million dollars last budget cycle as part for a pilot project to test the partnership and its effectiveness. It worked really well. Today, we're making the next installment payment and committing 20 million dollars more in funding for research. Fifteen million dollars will come from the State. 

And, I'm really pleased to announce that private sector partners are willing to help. The first partner to step up is Medica. Today, Medica is announcing a commitment of five million dollars. Please join me in recognizing and thanking David Tilford, CEO of Medica, who is with us today and whose foundation has committed the first legacy gift. I'm also excited to tell you that other partners will soon be joining and the total research amount will likely be well over the 20 million we're announcing today. Next, if Minnesota is going to be an effective global competitor, we need to reform and improve our health care system. We have two main challenges in this area: The first is that families and employers are being squeezed by health care premium increases they can't keep up with. They need relief. That's why we've formed the Smart Buy purchasing alliance to leverage the bulk purchasing power of sixty percent of Minnesota consumers to demand better health care at a better price. We are also proposing to empower consumers by expanding and encouraging the use of Health Savings Accounts, which are like IRAs and 401Ks, except they're for health care. They put consumers in charge and provide more health care choice and flexibility. 

The other big challenge is that our government welfare health care system is out of control and growing at a rate that will consume almost all of the state's budget within 15 years. If we don't get this under control, it will bankrupt the state and strangle our ability to fund our other priorities such as schools and roads. The longterm viability of those programs - and the state budget as a whole - demand responsible decisions now. Some will argue that we should raise taxes rather than slow the growth in these programs. That is simply unrealistic. Income tax revenues would have to double every eight years to pay for these programs at their current rate of growth. We must restrain the growth in these programs to sustainable levels by wisely and humanely changing them so they are comparable to surrounding states, and more focused on those with the fewest resources and the greatest needs. Next, Minnesota can lead the way globally by being the "renewable fuel capitol of America." We are already well on our way, and this year we will cement our lead when the Legislature passes my initiative to double the amount of ethanol in gasoline sold in Minnesota. Utilizing homegrown renewable fuels is good for our farmers, it's good for rural economic development, it's good for national security, and it's good for the environment. 

I would much rather have the fuel in our cars come from the Midwest than from the Middle East. Let's make Minnesota the Saudi Arabia of Renewable Fuels. Next, if Minnesota is going to be a successful global competitor, our government needs to be more dynamic, more responsive, and more accountable to the people. When it comes to spending the people's money, we shouldn't be afraid of the people. Today, I'm proposing what I call "Turbocharged Truth in Taxation." When each Minnesota taxpayer receives their annual "Truth in Taxation Form" in the mail, there will be something else in that envelope: three postcards one each for the county, city or township, and school district - the postcards will be called the Taxpayer Satisfaction Survey. The postcard would enable taxpayers to mail in a "no" vote if they think a levy increase goes beyond a reasonable level. If significant dissatisfaction is registered, a levy referendum on the amount of increase above a certain level will be triggered. We've got to trust the people. So once again, I also ask the Legislature to pass a carefully drawn and limited form of Initiative and Referendum. We need to allow the people the chance to directly speak on the major issues of the day. 

There are many other issues facing Minnesota. Let me address just a few more. In my address last year, I spoke on the issue of gaming. My preference then is my preference now: to keep gaming within its existing contours, but to explore a better deal for all Minnesotans. My hope was that tribes with large casino gaming interests would make a fair payment to the state in exchange for being granted a monopoly and other benefits. It appears they're not interested in such an agreement. As a result, we're left to explore other alternatives. We'll have more to say about this in the coming weeks. I will note that we are pleased with our discussions with the Tribes in Northern Minnesota that represent 85 per cent of Native Americans in our state. We also have critical work to do to improve our public safety. Methamphetamine addiction is an epidemic, a crime wave and a social tragedy rolled into one. We need new BCA agents, new penalties, new jails, new treatment options and new cleanup standards to deal with this new and deadly drug. 

We also need to better track, convict and lock up sex offenders for as long as possible. I urge the passage of legislation that accomplishes this as soon as possible. In addition to public safety, we need to make progress in protecting and improving our beautiful natural resources. Our world leading quality of life depends in part, upon the enjoyment Minnesotans get from the great outdoors and our beautiful natural resources. My bonding proposal includes significant funding to improve the environment and our natural resources, including the next round of CREP funding. It's imperative that we secure funding for that initiative this year. We also urge the Legislature to pass our proposal to create a new Conservation Heritage Foundation and pass a Constitutional Amendment to further dedicate funding for natural resources and the environment. We all know that in a fast-changing, hypercompetitive world, we can't compete if we don't change. But change we must. Minnesota loves disproving those who say "it can't be done." Can't be done? 

Right here in Rochester, we have both the world's best hospital and the world's fastest computer - in a town of 85,000 people. Go figure. We have the highest graduation rates, the broadest health care access, and the greatest level of home ownership and workforce participation in the country. And we did it all with a small population in a cold state that coastal big shots refer to as "flyover land." Minnesota prides itself on overcoming that stereotype. We know that creating jobs, educating kids and the other important work of government, takes brains, guts, speed, leadership and action. So, what is the state of our state? The state of the state is good, but not good enough. So we'd better get to work. We need to get bold. We need to get together. We need to get moving. And we need to do it now. Join me and let's go!Not far from here is a Saint Paul city park called "Swede Hollow." For decades it was a disadvantaged area of the city. There were none of the normal comforts. Phalen Creek was their sewage system.
In the 1930s, the Sanchelli family lived there. They were new to America and they worked hard. The Dad in the family was Tony. He would come home after his shift and stand on the bridge over the creek. In a wonderful voice, he would sing out over the Hollow: "America the Beautiful." You know the words ... for spacious skies ... and amber waves of grain... God shed his grace on thee.
When moms would try to put their kids to bed, children wouldn't go to sleep until they'd heard Tony sing. The lesson is, that even back then, and even for folks like Tony who didn't have much, Minnesota has always been a land of great opportunity and beauty.
We here serve a caring, creative, and hard- working people. A state of innovators. Their energy and compassion are writing a beautiful new chapter in Minnesota's history.
Thank you all for your warm welcome and your enthusiastic spirit of service.
All elected officials have a challenging job. On behalf of all Minnesota, I'm grateful for your service, and for the sacrifices your families make that allow you to serve.
I particularly want to thank the four people who know me best... but love me anyway: my wife Mary, my daughters Anna and Mara, and especially my mother-in-law, Beulah Anderson. Thank you for your love and support.
Today the state of our state is strong, hopeful, and prosperous.
· Our people are working. 
· Our students are learning. 
· And our citizens are healthy.
Despite challenges all around us, our success abounds:
· We're America's healthiest state. 
· We have just about the lowest poverty rate in America. 
· We have one of the lowest unemployment rates in the country.



· We have the highest performing students. 
· We lead the nation in the percentage of our citizens who have health insurance. 
· And we're nationally recognized for our water, great outdoors, renewable energy,
and quality of life.

All of us who have been called to serve in this awesome building have a spectacular opportunity. Everyone of us comes to this place with ideas and a passion to make things better. Let's tum that potential into results and show the country how it's done.

While it hasn't always been pretty, we've accomplished a great deal together:

· We've completed the biggest financial turnaround in Minnesota history, going from a 4.5 billion dollar deficit to a billion dollar surplus.

· We regained our status as the nation's innovators in education by becoming the

first state to adopt performance pay for teachers.

· We tossed the Profile of Learning and instituted clear, relevant educational standards.

· We started to change high school so students can make better use of their time and earn college credit.

· We laid the groundwork for a world-class higher education institution in Rochester.


· We developed report cards so parents can evaluate schools and senior citizens can evaluate nursing homes.

· We delivered a zero percent increase in premiums for state employees in our award-winning Minnesota Advantage program, because labor and management worked together to control costs.

· We launched an historic partnership between the University of Minnesota and the Mayo Clinic to advance human health, genomics, and the biosciences.

· We fought back against meth dealers and sex offenders.

· We implemented the largest transportation funding package in modem history. I thank Lt. Governor Molnau for her strong leadership on this and so many other issues.

· We provided funding for the vital Northstar commuter rail line from Big Lake to Minneapolis, and I'm delighted that we've received final design approval from the federal government just yesterday.

· We created the JOB-Z program to bring thousands of needed jobs and millions in capital investment to greater Minnesota.

· We focused on the key role livestock producers play in our agriculture economy and are helping them to innovate for the future.

· We doubled our ethanol standard, increased wind power, and implemented America's first biodiesel requirement.

· We're reforming and streamlining state government through our "Drive to Excellence" effort. And it's producing results.



· And we were the first state in the nation to implement a program so our citizens can buy safe, affordable prescription medicine from Canada.
But there's more to do.
My goal as governor is to make Minnesota the best state in which to live, work, and raise a family.
But we can't succeed unless we prosper economically.
All of us crave security.
But in this viciously competitive world, there is no security without real prosperity. And there is no future prosperity without innovation.
Look at General Motors. Look at the airline industry. Look at the stagnant economies of Western Europe. They all made promises they can't keep because they can't back them up with real prosperity.
In a changing world, our future success depends on our ability to innovate. That's great news, because innovation is what Minnesota does best.
Let me tell you about what's happening in a really innovative town I've visited several times: Benson, Minnesota, population of about 3,300.
Anytime you create something everyone needs from something nobody wants, you're getting somewhere.
On one side of town, they're building an energy plant that creates electricity from turkey droppings. With over 46 million turkeys, Minnesota has a lot of droppings.
Nearby, they make over 45 million gallons of ethanol at the Chippewa Valley Ethanol Company.
To expand their operation, they started making vodka out of wheat and rye.
Now, in order to make their business more efficient, they're beginning to use biomass energy--burning com stalks and husks--to replace their use of natural gas.
They have another company in town called Future Products, which is using com to make everything from plastic containers to tee shirts.



Benson, Minnesota, a little town on the prairie, beat winning author Thomas Friedman to the punch. He says: America can win the coming global economic battle because America is "the world's dream machine."
Let's lift up Minnesota as America's dream machine, the nation's leader in innovation.
A few years back a couple of Minnesota brothers, Ron and Dan Shimek, dreamed of a new way to heat homes--a fireplace that had no chimney, that ran on gas. They built a prototype in their garage.
And the first time they flipped the switch, it blew up the living room. But they didn't give up. They tried again. Fifteen patents later, they were the largest maker of gas fireplaces in the world!
Minnesota is successful, but our future isn't guaranteed. We have to go out and win it in a hypercompetitive, global economy.
Nostalgia is not a strategic plan. And as Bill Gates says, "Success is a lousy teacher. It seduces smart people into thinking they can't lose." The challenges we face are big, different, real, and they are here.
One of our modem icons is the iPod. It entertains us with music and video. But it's a reflection of the world we live in now.
Technology today gives almost everybody access to almost everything, everywhere, at any time. It gives people previously unimaginable freedom and choice.
Government must do the same. We must innovate and offer our people a new level of freedom, choice, and opportunity. If we don't, government will become less effective. Or worse, a wet blanket on progress.
As we embark on this adventure, we should be inspired by the words of John Kennedy. He said, "Time and the world do not stand still. Change is the law of life. And those who look only to the past or the present are certain to miss the future."
Now, let's chart our course to the future.
Let's describe and declare the kind of Minnesota we want to live in a decade from now. It should be:
· A Minnesota whose education system is not only nation-leading, but worldleading, and we have the test scores to prove it.
· A Minnesota where healthcare is available and affordable to everyone with consumers in the driver's seat.

· A Minnesota that is the best place in America to start and grow innovative businesses and jobs.
· A Minnesota that is the safest place in the nation to live. · A Minnesota that has solved its racial disparities in education, housing, and
healthcare. · A Minnesota that has conquered chronic homelessness; doubled its use of
renewable energy; and has a modem, efficient, and energy-saving transportation system. · A Minnesota where water pollution only appears in the history books. · And... a Minnesota where the traditional family structure is revitalized and life is protected and respected.
All of these goals will require innovation. We can make progress towards some of these goals this year. Others will take longer.
We're great innovators because we're free to dream. The ultimate protectors of our freedom are the men and women who serve in the United States military.
However, we all know that freedom isn't free. But we also know that not everybody pays the same price. All pay something, some pay a little more, some pay a lot, and some...pay with the ultimate measure of their service.
In six days, I'll be traveling to Camp Shelby, Mississippi, to say thanks and farewell for now to 2,600 Minnesotans who will be shipping out to Iraq. Some of those soldiers are watching us today via the internet. Let's look at the camera at the back of the chamber and give them our best wishes for a safe and successful mission.
I'd also like to recognize three people to whom we owe a debt of gratitude and who symbolize the selfless service of our military:
Merilee and Daniel Carlson lost their son Michael in Iraq last year. One of our own here in the Capitol endures the same grief, and carries the same burden of sacrifice. Senator Becky Lourey lost her son Matthew in Iraq last May.
Please join me in showing our appreciation for the tremendous sacrifice of the Loureys, Carlsons, others who have been lost, all the men and women who proudly wear the uniform, and their families.
We need to give them more than our applause. I've put forward a package of proposals to further support members of. our military and veterans. It includes an income tax exemption for military retirement pay and other assistance programs.
Please pass this legislation as soon as possible.



Now, to the other work that lies before us in this short, non-budget session.
There are four things that will make the biggest difference in creating Minnesota's future: education, healthcare, natural resources, and growing jobs.
Education made Minnesota what it is today, and education will make us what we will become tomorrow.
I read about a new Saint Paul school teacher the other day. She walked into her classroom and found that there were great needs. She realized her students spoke five different languages. Her name--Harriet Bishop, Minnesota's first school teacher. The year: 1847. She overcame great difficulties and succeeded. We honor her as the founder of Minnesota education. She rose to the challenges of her time. Let's rise to the challenges of our time.
I ask that you pass the early childhood education initiatives I announced this week to help make sure our youngest get a better start in the education race.
We also need to make sure that more of our resources get where they matter most. Let's require that at least 70 percent of school funding actually reaches the classroom.
We also need to realize that science and math are the currency of our new economy. We need more rigor in these areas.
We should upgrade our school standards to require Algebra One by eighth grade and Algebra Two and Chemistry to graduate from high school.
And while we're at it, let's bring a lesson from the game room into the classroom, by including digital literacy as part of our school standards so that our kids know how to access and use technology as a basic skill.
Advanced Placement and International Baccalaureate programs provide the rigor and relevance we need to prepare our students for the future. But they're not available to most of them.
I'm proposing that we provide seven million dollars in financial incentives for at least ten pioneering districts to use AP or IB for all students, in all grades.
In addition, we need to transform our high schools so we are better preparing our young people for the economy of the future. Academic progress in our secondary schools has flattened out.



Let's provide funding so up to five pioneering high schools can show the way by fundamentally overhauling their structure to focus on college preparedness or technical training that is relevant and rigorous for all students.
And if we want to further capitalize on the vastly growing Chinese market, more of us will need to speak their language. I'm directing the Department of Education to develop model Chinese language curriculum so it's available to every school district.
Success for Minnesota in a global economy also demands that we develop the potential of all our citizens. Disparities in graduation rates and academic performance between white students and students of color continue to be a moral, social, and economic crisis.
But, there are rays of hope.
Andersen Open, a K-8 school in the Phillips Neighborhood of Minneapolis, is an example of a school that is beating the odds through innovation, hard work, and high expectations for everybody.
Ninety-three percent of the students at Anderson Open are disadvantaged and 53 percent come from homes where English is not the first language. Last year, the school joined the Teacher Advancement Program and it's now part of Q Compo.
Teachers are paid for performance, meaningful professional development is provided for staff, and rigorous evaluation of instruction is conducted.
The results are remarkable. In just over one year, the students have improved on every measurement. The number of students passing the Basic Skills Test went from 38 percent to 62 percent!
This is possible because of the strong teaching staff and the strong leadership of the school's principal, Mark Bonine. Mark's message is clear: He sets high expectations for all students and all teachers.
Let's thank Mark, who is with us today, his staff, and all of Minnesota's great educators for their hard work and dedication.
While progress is being made, we can do more.
I've proposed school choice as an alternative for poor, failing or disabled children. The legislature should pass school choice as an alternative for at least our most disadvantaged students.
In the meantime, we should pursue other new and innovative approaches that produce results, such as the The Knowledge is Power Program, or KIPP schools.



These are rigorous, public, college prep schools where disadvantaged students develop the knowledge, skills, and character needed to succeed in top quality high schools, colleges, and the competitive world beyond.
I'm directing our Department of Education to seek out and authorize KIPP charter schools in Minnesota, focusing on areas where our needs are the greatest.
In addition to improving our education system, our future success also depends on innovating and improving our healthcare system.
People currently excluded from health insurance tend to be the working poor.
Basic health insurance is available for less than 200 dollars per month. We need to direct our HMOs and insurance companies to raise awareness and get more uninsured people to use these plans. We may also need to consider incentives or requirements for uninsured citizens to have health insurance coverage.
Let's also measure and pay for better healthcare outcomes. What gets measured and paid for, gets done.
We can start by focusing on chronic conditions like childhood obesity and diabetes, which are significant problems in our society.
There are clear best practice measurements for treating these diseases that will save lives and save money. We should begin to reward providers for meeting these performance measurements right away.
Today I'm directing the Department of Employee Relations to incorporate "pay for performance" into the state's health plan and will ask the Legislature to expand this approach to all public programs.
We must also control other healthcare costs. Every business can tell you how much they charge for their service. Healthcare providers should be able to do the same.
Last year, we required some healthcare providers to supply some cost information. Now it's time to require it from all providers and for more procedures.
We must also focus on reducing administrative costs in healthcare.
Say your grandma goes to a new doctor. They hand her that annoying, long form, with all the questions she's had to answer ten other times in ten other offices. The doctor asks her what medicines she takes, and all of us have trouble remembering the names and the dosages. Maybe the physicians can't treat her until her medical file has been transferred

from across town. And then the providers, patients, and the insurers engage in a paper war over what to pay for.
In the meantime, grandma's mailbox fills up with paper that says, "THIS IS NOT A BILL."
We need to help healthcare administration enter the 21 st century. We need electronic medical records.
I am proposing a 12 million dollar program to help small healthcare providers make the transition to an interconnected electronic medical record system so that medical errors are reduced and healthcare is improved. Today I am also challenging the providers and healthcare plans to match this amount so we can make progress more quickly.
Finally on the issue of health, Minnesota is recognized for our public health and emergency response systems. But as we face the threat of a worldwide bird flu pandemic, we need to be even better prepared. I propose we bolster our efforts with an immediate ten million dollar infusion of funds to further strengthen our defenses against this threat.
While we work on the health of our people, we must also work on the health of our natural resources. They help define our quality of life in this beautiful state.
The threat to our natural resources is growing faster than our ability to protect them.
But to do so properly, we need a plan. I am grateful for the recent efforts to reform the governance of the great outdoors and the use of the Environmental Trust Fund. Please pass these reforms this year. But let's also take the next step, and fund the development of a long-term, statewide strategic plan for conservation.
I also urge you to pass a Constitutional Amendment to dedicate funding for conservation and clean water. Don't water it down, don't make it too broad. Just pass it.
In the land ofl0,000 lakes, water matters a lot to all of us. Too many of our lakes are in trouble and they need our help.
So while we're waiting for the Constitutional Amendment to pass, let's make a 20 million dollar investment, right now, for Clean Water Legacy funding.
I also urge you to approve my bonding request for 200 million dollars for conservation, the outdoors, and parks.
Likewise, let's pass my proposal to achieve a 90 percent reduction of mercury emissions to keep the air and water clean for our kids.



We can also help our environment, and gain economic advantage, by leading further . . innovation in renewable energy. The world demand for fossil fuels is exploding but the supply is flat. That's a big problem, which needs to be addressed.
Let's face it. Washington has been slow to lead on this issue. But we can't afford to wait for them. Let's lead the way and set a strategic goal of "25-by-25"--so that 25 percent of all types of our energy will corne from renewable sources by 2025.
To accomplish this goal, we need to make big progress with our cars.
In Brazil, cars run on fuel with 20 to 100 percent ethanol. Yet, U.S. automakers say they can't provide us with these cars because there are not enough ethanol pumps to service them.
Let's fix that.
Currently, most gas stations offer three octane levels. It's time we change one of those to E85.
In 2004, I signed an executive order that requires the state to purchase renewable fuel vehicles. Today, I've signed an executive order to require state employees to actually use E85 in our state vehicles.
Many of the proposals I've outlined in education, healthcare, and natural resources will take money.
But adding unnecessary economic burdens won't help.
In the Boeing assembly plant, while they're building the planes, they hang big, yellow weights on the wings until the engines arrive. On the weights is written: 8,000 POUNDS. REMOVE BEFORE FLIGHT. If we expect our economy to fly, we need to remove some of the weight we hang on it.
In a hyper-competitive economy, raising taxes is a bad strategy, especially in an already highly-taxed state.
Fortunately, we don't need to raise taxes. Our strong economy has generated double digit revenue increases this biennium. The best way to generate revenue is to keep our job providers growing.
In strategic ways, we must reduce the burdens that government places on job providers and taxpayers in order to spur economic growth.

So, in this short session, let's focus on a fe';V key priorities in this area.
Let's put a cap on property taxes.
Let's accelerate the move toward a single sales factor corporate tax so we don't punish job creation and plant expansion in Minnesota.
Let's encourage our dairy producers to innovate by passing a dairy investment tax credit.
And here's a no-brainer: Let's eliminate the marriage penalty in our tax code.
One of the most important roles of government is to protect its citizens. Sometimes that means protecting them from their own government. I urge us to corne together to pass meaningful and responsible reforms to Minnesota's eminent domain laws.
Finally, let's not be afraid to debate and take action on issues which make some in this building nervous, but that are supported by most Minnesotans.
Let's walk the walk and hold ourselves more accountable by passing performance pay for politicians.
Let's encourage and welcome legal immigration, but make sure we're not looking the other way on immigration that's illegal.
And let's make sure that courts can't throw out our defense of marriage laws in Minnesota, like they have in other states. Let's define marriage in our Constitution as being between a man and a woman.
We shouldn't be afraid of rational and robust debates about these issues. This building was built for just such debates and the foundation and the walls are strong.
One of Minnesota's most recognizable symbols is the Split Rock Light House on the North Shore of Lake Superior. It was built a hundred years ago to help ships find their way to safety on the world's biggest, and most unpredictable lake.
Minnesota is and always has been a "lighthouse" state. We are a beacon of hope, optimism, and the innovative spirit to get things done.
Harriet Bishop was a lighthouse, bringing education to the frontier.
Dred Scott, a one-time Minnesota resident, was a lighthouse of freedom for those forced to be slaves.
Sister Kenney was a lighthouse of healing for the victims of polio.


Norman Borlaug was a lighthouse, finding new ways to feed the world.
Minnesota's corn growers, who began the ethanol revolution, were a lighthouse--showing the way to a better energy future.
The Mayo Clinic is a lighthouse of medicine, shining its beacon across the whole world.
And in his own way, as a ball player, Kirby Puckett was a lighthouse, showing that passion could defy gravity... with a smile.
A lighthouse works "because it rises above the circumstances to do its job and shines its light a long, long way off.
I want this historic building to be a lighthouse again. For that to happen... we all need to rise above the circumstances of politics and personality and look to the future.
John Kennedy put it best when he said, "In the final analysis, our most basic, common link is that we all inhabit this small planet. We all breathe the same air. We all cherish our children's future. And we are all mortal"
He's describing us.
Years from now, the configuration of politics and personalities currently in this place will matter little.
What will matter is how we lived, how we served, and how we made things better.
May God open our eyes to our common purpose, guide our service in this time and place, and continue to richly bless all the people of Minnesota.
Thank you all.Thank you. Well this is now my fifth State of the State address. I never really thought I had that much to say. In all the years I spent in this chamber, I sometimes saw Mr. Lincoln looking down on us and wondered what he might have thought.
I think he might say that politics and politicians aren't too popular these days and our first job is to work together to reestablish the people's trust in our government.
In response to political criticism, Lincoln once said this, "If I were two-faced, why would I be wearing this one?"
The face of state government needs to be trustworthy and open.
We serve in this beautiful and historic building, by the people's choice, to do their work with a spirit of humility, service, and gratitude.
Minnesota is incredibly blessed in every way. They say that gratitude makes way for more blessing.

So, let's begin by expressing our gratitude for those who carry the heaviest load for our nation and state.
During the past four years, the First Lady, who is with us today, and I have had a chance to spend a great deal of time with members of our military and their families. We have seen their uncommon courage and extraordinary dedication. These brave men and women come from all over our great state,' and they are inspiring examples of duty and honor.
The First Lady and I went to Kosovo a few years ago to visit the many troops from Minnesota National Guard who are serving there to keep the peace. While we were there, we met Sergeant Mark Gaulke. Mark served in the military for 28 years before retiring in 2005.

Mark is with us in the gallery and he's holding a picture of his daughter, Jessica. She is a student at Augsburg and is currently on her honeymoon, otherwise I'm sure she'd want to be with us today. Jessica just stepped down as Minneapolis Aquatennial Queen of the Lakes, but not because of her wedding. She stepped down because she will be deploying soon with her National Guard unit for a tour of duty in Iraq.
Members of the United States military deserve our deepest appreciation. Join me in thanking Sergeant Mark Gaulke, Specialist Jessica Gaulke and all the men and women of our military, their families, and our veterans.
The news last week that 2,600 members of the Minnesota National Guard will have their tours in Iraq extended hit our

military families and their communities really hard. It frustrates and disappoints all of us. But I know the quality of these people: They will continue to do their duty with excellence.
The burden under which they are serving today strains ·even their steely and selfless commitment.
We need to do our duty by supporting them and all members of the military with our words and our deeds. We need a surge of support for our military families, and we need it now.
I'm calling on every Minnesotan to find a way to express support for these outstanding Americans. Here are just a few ways that you can help: Buy a "Support Our Troops" license plate. Help an organization geared towards assisting the military or veterans. Go on the Governor's web page and sign up for the First Lady's Military Family Care Initiative. Donate money to the Minnesota Military Family Foundation or the Minnesotans' Military Appreciation Fund. Attend an event like a deployment or welcome home ceremony to show your support. Pick up the tab at a restaurant for one of these heroes or their families. If you see them around town, stick out your hand, shake their hand, look them in .the eye, and give them heartfelt thanks from a fellow Minnesotan.
I proposed a veterans and military package along with· Senator Vickerman, Representative Haws, Representative Severson, and others. It includes a tax exemption for military pension benefits, a Minnesota GI bill for college expenses, which I look forward to working with the Attorney

General on, she has a similar proposal, it also has full funding for the National Guard's budget requests, and. dramatic increases for Minnesota's veterans programs.
Please pass it; we owe it to these great heroes.

One of the privileges of serving here is being able to work in this amazing bUilding.
Cass Gilbert and all those who designed the Capitol left us a message.
They put a sculpture on top of the Capitol called "The Progress of the State," or the Quadriga.
In the sculpture, a person rides a chariot carrying a banner that says "Minnesota." Now, the golden guy in the chariot is not Joe Mauer, he's called "Prosperity." I think here is the lesson:
The progress of our state depends on prosperity, but it also depends on all of us working together.
In the statue, two strong women are out front leading and guiding the four golden horses. Like these leaders, Democrats and Republicans need to work together to guide our state in a common direction. We have plenty of powers here, that's not the problem: The key is pulling at the same speed, in the same direction - all in the name of progress and prosperity for the citizens we serve.

The state of our state is great, but we can make Minnesota even better.

There are many important things we need to do to advance

prosperity and prepare Minnesota for the future this session,

such things as improving our transportation system,

enhancing public safety, continuing to support agriculture

and our natural resource-based industries, maintaining a

pro-job business climate and stimulating rural economic

development.

'

But in the short time we have today,' I want to focus our common efforts to steer four big "horses" that will have a very large role in powering Minnesota's prosperity and progress.

They are these:

· Better Government · Better Energy · Better Education, and · Better Health Care


Government provides important services and has an important role to play. But we need to be careful, so that our desire to do well through government doesn't slowly suffocate and stifle one of our key advantages: the unprecedented freedoms and liberties we possess and the personal responsibility that comes with it.


This building is filled with ideas, philosophies and agendas that call for government to do more, and more and more. That inevitably leads to demands for more taxes, more regulation, and more bureaucracy.
A key measure of good government is this: Do the taxpayers get good value for the money they pay? During the past four years, we've made some great progress on this front. Let me give you just one example.
Brenda Willard is a manager in our Administration Department. She and her colleagues helped develop purchasing standards and policies for state computers, cell phones, and furniture that will save the state over $22 million. That's the combined annual tax bill for 1,100 Minnesota families! Brenda is with us in the gallery today. Let's thank her and all of her colleagues and team members for their great work.
When my budget is released next week, you will see a key theme: 'Minnesota government should stop paying for good intentions and start paying for better performance.
I'll be more likely to reach for the signing pen, rather than the veto stamp, if the bill on my desk clearly defines expected results. It should also have clear measurements for those results and link spending to performance, rather than just wishful thinking.
We owe that to the hard-working taxpayers of this state.

And just like Minnesota families, state government needs to live within its means. We just climbed out of an epic budget hole, and we're not going to spend our way back into one!
Under the November budget forecast, state spending will go up about $1 billion automatically because we'll be serving more people under our entitlement programs. Beyond that, an additional $2 billion is available for use. That means the state can use about $3 billion in the upcoming budget cycle.
That would be about a 10 percent increase over the current
budget. Ten percent growth is more than most Minnesotans will see in their paychecks and it should be enough growth for their government, too.
I've said it before and I'll say it again - Minnesotans are not undertaxed.
We should lessen their burden by cutting taxes. Thanks for your efforts to pass the bill which provides tax relief for college tuition and other education costs. I urge you to pass additi08al tax-cutting legislation this session that provides property tax relief, tax relief for veterans, and other tax cuts that will strategically help our economy.
I also continue to urge you to cap property taxes by placing a limit on how much any local unit of government can . increase property taxes without voter approval. Now some have opposed this idea by citing the need for "local control." That's understandable, I've heard those concerns and today I offer a compromise by proposing to exempt any local unit
..
of government from this requirement if they get less than a third of their general fund revenues from the state.

But being fiscally responsible is not our only duty. We need to aggressively prepare for the future in other ways.

Renewable energy is an important part of Minnesota's future.
Our great nation's sad addiction to foreign oil exposes the country to a reckless amount of economic and national security risk.
Even worse, as with many addicts, we are buying from some of the very people who, in many cases, want to hurt us.
Our nation has been asleep at the switch on energy policy for decades. The good news is that while much of the country has just begun to hear the energy wake-up call, Minnesota has been an early riser. While others slept in on renewable energy, we got up early, we made the coffee, we cooked the breakfast, we read the paper, we did some chores and we took the dog for a walk.
An example of our renewable energy leadership is Mark Willers, who is with us today in the gallery. Mark and his family have a farm near Luverne. He is also on the board of a farmer-owned ethanol co-op and he heads up a local wind energy company.
Mark represents the visionary farmers who didn't wait for the future to happen to them. Let's thank Mark and all of our Minnesota energy pioneers for their great work that got us to this point.

Minnesota has great renewable energy policies. Now let's show the nation how to move even more boldly towardS energy independence.
I strongly urge you to consider my "Next Generation Energy Plan," add your own good ideas, and let's pass a comprehensive renewable energy plan as soon as possible.
That plan will help us move away from fossil fuels, and it will also help us clean up the environment and improve the environment. But we can do even more. Minnesota can't reverse global climate change by ourselves, but we can do our part and help lead the way. Our energy plan will significantly reduce the amount of carbon we put into the atmosphere.
I look forward to working with the Democrats and the Republicans to pass and sign comprehensive historic renewable energy legislation this session.
While we're talking about improving our environment, there's another step that needs to take place and I hope we'll take it this session - and that's finally passing a constitutional amendment to dedicate funding for the outdoors and conservation. We've come close in past years, but our environment can't wait anymore. I continue to support this important effort and urge you to do so as well.


Another fundamental key to making Minnesota better socially and economically is the urgent need to make our schools even better.
Now, you all know that Minnesota is at or near the top in most measures of student performance. Nearly every state would love to have our school performance results.
We're blessed with fantastic educators, engaged parents and, of course, we have above average students.
But nation-leading in student performance isn't good enough anymore. Our students need to be world-leading, not just nation-leading.

In any discussion, though, regarding education, the debate about the level of funding consumes most of the oxygen in the room. Very little time gets actually spent on the reforms needed to modernize our education system. So, let me address funding right up-front.
My budget next week will propose an increase of up to four percent per year for our schools for general purposes, plus increases in many special aspects of education funding as well.
But we're not just going to pay for good intentions anymore. We're going to pay for better performance as part of a new "Successful Schools" initiative.

Every district will get a general formula increase. of two percent in each of the next two years. Each school will also be eligible to receive an additional two percent per year as a performance bonus if the school achieves or maintains at least a three-star rating in reading and math on their Minnesota school Report Card. That's not a particularly high bar.
My budget will include $150' million for the bonus portion of this "Successful Schools" initiative. We need to pay for performance and quit enabling schools that don't meet our expectations.

Another hard reality we must face is this: American high schools are obsolete in their current form.
One of the most forward thinkers of our time, Bill Gates, said this: "", our high schools - even when they're working exactly as designed - cannot teach our kids what they need to know today. Training the workforce of tomorrow 'with the high schools of today is like trying to teach kids about computers on a 50-year-old mainframe. It's the wrong tool for the times." Close quote.
U.S. students score near the top on international test scores in 4th grade, but by 8th grade our students are about in the middle of the pack and by the end of high'school they are near the bottom.

Too many of our high school students today are engaged in academic loitering for much of their high school career. In too many cases, our high school students are bored, checked-out, coasting, not even vaguely aware of their posthigh school plans, if they have any, and they are just marking time.
It's costing us a lot of money and it's costing them their future. This is a silent crisis and has the potential to devastate our future prosperity if we don't fix it.
We made some good strides last year, and in proceeding years, but much more needs to be done. Let's make Minnesota the number one state in the nation for reforming high schools by creating "3R" high schools. The three Rs here stand for rigor, relevance, and results.
My budget next week will include $75 million in funding to encourage high schools to become "3R" schools. This is also a pay for performance deal. They will be required to do a lot. First:
(1) 3R schools will be required to implement rigorous and relevant courses for all students, including career and technical courses in high-demand fields.
(2) 3R schools must provide access for all students to programs that provide college credit opportunities.
(3) In 3R schools, every student, every student, must complete a full year of college while in high school.
(4) And in 3R schools they must provide opportunities for students to pursue work-based learning and internships.

We hope that every high school will become a 3R high school. But even if they choose not to, the program will be optional, all high schools will still be required to make other changes.
So, our budget will provide additional funding for more schools to provide AP or IB programming for all students in all grade levels.
My budget will also provide funding to transform more schools so they focus on science, technology, engineering, and math. We will also be asking the Legislature to take three additional steps this year: (1) adopt new, more rigorous math standards for all our students; (2) require an individual graduation plan for 8th graders and above that
parents will need to sign each year; and (3) require that all
students complete four years of a second language in order to graduate from high school.
Now, this may all seem like a big leap, but the bar is very high. I urge you to pass significant high school reform this session.

But we also need to change and modernize the way we deliver instruction.
I was told the other day that a majority of teenagers now spend up to 50 percent of their waking hours interacting with a device: televisions, iPods, YouTube, e-mail, text messaging, the Internet, cell phones, video ga"mes, digital cameras, and the list goes on and on and grows by the day.

I was with my daughters just the other day at a mall in Eagan and they noticed a cell phone store next to the place we were going into. They begged and pleaded with me to go into the store just to look at some of the new phones, even thought they knew we weren't' going to be buying one.
Now as you all know, the cell phones of today are not just phones. They're much more, both technologically and socially. I said okay, and they ran ahead of me and into the store with great excitement and glee. When I entered a moment later, they were standing in frozen awe with their mouths open in front of the display containing a "Sidekick III with illuminating features."
It took me a moment to bring them out of what appeared to be some sort of technology-induced trance or coma. Then, I burst their bubble. I told them that Apple had just come out with a new phone and that its makers believe it will leapfrog all other phones and hand-held technology on the market. I jokingly told my kids they had already fallen behind. They were stunned but we spent the next ten minutes talking about the all about the capabilities of the new Apple iPhone. And this is not uncommon for kids if this generation...
Learning and interaction for today's children is profoundly, profoundly different than even a short time ago. In many ways, they communicate, they socialize, and act differently because of technology.
Our education system is behind the times and out of sync with this new reality. Our primary method of instruction is to have adults with dry erase markers lecturing to often

bored students who carry home backpacks so full of paper they look like they could be training to join Will Steger on an Arctic expedition.
We need to move Minnesota into the modern age by making things like more on-line learning opportunities available to
our students. If done well, these courses can open world-
class instruction in almost any subject to every student in all corners of our state.
To get us there, though, my budget will provide funding to enhance current on-line opportunities, as well as remove the financial barriers for districts wanting to purchase online course work.

All of these initiatives will help students be academically better prepared to go beyond high school. But we also need to do more to get them and their families more financially prepared to go to college.
Last summer, I announced my ACHIEVE proposal to provide two free years of college in Minnesota for top performing students. I continue to think that proposal is a good idea, and urge you to pass it. ACHIEVE provides a powerful incentive for students to study hard throughout their high school career and it increases the likelihood that our most talented students will stay in Minnesota at a time when competition for top talent is more fierce than ever.

I have heard the concerns about this proposal from those who feel ACHIEVE is too focused and too heavily weighted on just top performing students.
So, in the spirit of compromise, I offer you an alternative proposal, I'll call it ACHIEVE II which addresses both preparing for and paying for college. Under this proposal, high school students who take rigorous college level courses while in high school can earn college credit and receive a scholarship that they will be able to use at any college or university in Minnesota. If a student finishes a year of college in high school, they will receive enough money under the scholarship to pay for an average year's tuition and fees at a Minnesota public university regardless of their class rank and regardless of their ACT scores. So it will be open and serve many more students than the original ACHIEVE proposal. This will result in students who take a year of college in high school, they will get at least a free year of college, and the program will benefit many, many students.

We also need to make sure, though, that education funding as possible reaches the classroom where it matters most. So I again encourage you to pass my proposal requiring that at least 70 percent of the money get into the classroom. We can improve our children's future by improving our education system by driving resources and money into the classroom.

We also need to improve our higher education system. My budget will contain substantial increases for our colleges,

universities and tuition aid programs. For the first time, it will also contain $50 million in performance bonuses for higher education institutions that achieve clearly defined and obtained strategic goals.

It's also clear that we need to do more to help our youngest learners. They need to be better prepared for kindergarten and the school years beyond. The payoff can be well worth the investment. There have been a number of early childhood ideas already discussed during the opening weeks of this legislative session.
One of those ideas is all-day kindergarten. I believe all-day K has merit, but it is enormously expensive if it is required for all kids statewide. Its price tag is $320 million and it would not be targeted to the kids who need it the most. The truth is that children from advantaged backgrounds don't generally have an elementary academic performance problem. In an era of limited resources and seemingly limitless needs, we need to focus and prioritize our efforts and our money.
With all of that in, mind, I'm proposing an early childhood scholarship program to provide up to $4,000 per child for at-risk students to attend a certified kindergarten readiness program of their choice. This will get help to the kids who need it most and, hopefully, it will help close the achievement gap, which we need to work on more. We've made progress, but not nearly enough and not nearly fast enough.

As you can see, we have much work to do in education.
Let's not allow our nostalgia to limit our children's future.
We owe our children their own future, not our past.

We have other large challenges and opportunities in front of us. One of them is the need to fix our broken health care system. We have a historic opportunity to accomplish real reform. Let's take the journey together by passing my Minnesota Health Connections plan.
Expanding access to health insurance is a priority. But expanding access to a broken system is not a complete solution. We need to have a comprehensive approach that simultaneously focuses on improving access, improving quality, and lowering cost.
Let me start with access. We 'have a goal that all Minnesotans should be covered by health insurance. This does not mean a single-payer; it doesn't necessarily mean or shouldn't mean that the government takes over the system and pays for all of that coverage. There are many ways to achieve that goal. While we expand access, we also need to fix the underlying system and make sure that our efforts are financially sustainable.
Under current law, without anybody casting a vote, without anyone doing anything, under current law, access to our state-subsidized health care programs will expand to cover

an additional 45,000 Minnesotans this biennium. But we need to do more than that, our first installment for additional access should consist of expanding coverage to all children under age 21, not just 18, with a household income of $60,000 or less for a family of four.
But we also have to focus on cost containment. Unfortunately, providers and consumers in the current system have little motivation to contain costs. '
But market forces can help reduce cost and improve quality. Let me give you an example.
Lasik surgery was introduced about ten years ago. It was priced about $5,000 per eye and only available in limited locations. After ten years of price and quality wars in a real marketplace, the price has come down to about $500 an eye, quality has improved, and access has grown dramatically.
So while market approaches may not work for all medical procedures, we know that engaged, motivated consumers are a powerful force in controlling cost, especially when price and quality measurements are easily understood.
As the private market begins to change and implement cost containment strategies, we should study them and apply the best of them, what is working, and apply it to our public, programs. I propose MinnesotaCare II, which will take the framework of MinnesotaCare and modernize it to introduce consumer choice and competition so that MinnesotaCare consumers can obtain the benefit of lower premiums along with incentives for making healthy choices.

We will also reduce costs by creating the Minnesota Health Insurance Exchange, to allow uninsured individuals access to . health insurance that will lower premium costs by roughly 30 percent.
The Insurance Exchange will also absorb administrative costs for small businesses purchasing insurance and give the employees access to a greater array of insurance products.
Finally, comprehensive reform this year should also move Minnesota toward an interoperable electronic medical records system; overhaul our mental health system; streamline, thank you thank you Representative Greiling, Minnesota's billing and coding systems into a single operation; and advance efforts to pay for better health rather than just procedures provided.


As we finish here today, I am reminded of a story about a man of great intellect and great perspective.
David McCullough is one of the premier historians of our time. He's. taught us a lot about John Adams, Harry Truman, Teddy Roosevelt, the founding of our nation, and some of the most critical moments in our history.
I heard he recently made a presentation to a very distinguished audience. In the question and answer period, someone asked him which period in American history was most important. He thought for a moment and his simple answer was, "This one, right now."

Looking back is interesting and helpful. But we have to embrace the importance of "right now." We don't have certainty about what lies ahead for our economy, our national security, or our society. But we do know that the people of Minnesota have chosen the folks in this room to work together and to do our very best to make decisions that lead us towards a better Minnesota and a prosperity for all our citizens. Our state is filled with wonderful people. Minnesotans are kind, they're generous, hard-working, and they are born innovators. They will certainly do their part if we do ours. Together, let's focus on the future and boldly lead, right now. Thank you very much. May God bless each of you and may God bless the great state of Minnesota.More than 80 years ago, a young man from Central Minnesota made an historic journey, alone, in an airplane across the Atlantic.
When Charles Lindbergh emerged from the plane, he said just what you might expect a Minnesotan to say, "Well ... I made it." This year marks our wonderful state's lS0th birthday. For this occasion, we can set aside a bit of our usual Minnesota modesty and look back with pride on what we've accomplished together.
Our economy has successfully grown and evolved. We do everything from feeding the world to exploring the wonders of cyberspace.
We've been enriched by the presence of different cultures. We mix together, appreciating how our differences contribute to a richer Minnesota.
We've faced floods, fires, tornadoes, and wars, and we've overcome.
We've produced great people: Norman Borlaug and Sister Kenny; Seymour Cray and Earl Bakken. This special place raised Judy Garland, Prince, and Bob Dylan; John Madden, Vern Gagne, and Charles Bender; Hubert Humphrey, Herb Brooks, and Roy Wilkins, to name just a few.

Here in the Saint Cloud area, you have local favorites as well, including Alice Wheelock Whitney, Dave Durenberger, Jim Eisenreich, and Al Loehr.
On my block in South Saint Paul, it was the Bruggemans, Marshinkes, Daniches, Boljanoviches, Elsenpeters, and the Pokornys. They weren't famous, but they were pretty special, too.
I'm delighted to deliver this speech here in the "Granite City." Much of this area is built on solid rock. This area's values reflect the strength of our state and the goodness of our people.
Al Loehr is a hometown example of these qualities and values. Al was the son of a stone cutter. As a young man, Al went to work for the railroad. He went to war in the South Pacific as part of the greatest generation. He landed by ship in the port city of Hiroshima and witnessed the destruction of war.
Like many in his generation, he helped save the world and then came home and helped build his community. He returned to Saint Cloud and the railroad. He served as mayor here and led efforts to further improve this city.
He was a Minnesota Commissioner of Veterans Affairs and has given over 50 years of service to the cause of veterans. He is Minnesota bedrock, and we stand on his shoulders today. Join me in thanking a true Minnesotan, Al Loehr.

It's because of the hard work, dedication, and character of our people, that Minnesota is at or near the top in most quality of life measures.
We're number one in child well-being, home ownership and access to health insurance.
We're number one in voter turnout, Fortune 500 companies per capita, and production of medical devices.
We're number one in sugar beets, sweet corn, green peas, and turkeys.
We're number one in ACT scores, the percentage of adults with a high school diploma, and number two in the country in eighth grade math scores.
We're near the top in E-85 pumps, wind energy, renewable energy, and recycling.
We've been judged the most livable, the healthiest, the most generous, and the hardest working state in the nation.
Recently, the City of Saint Cloud won a Gold Medal as the most livable city in the world. Mayor Kleis, that's about as good as it gets. Congratulations to you and your fantastic city.
Our ambition as Minnesota leaders should be to make this state the best place in America - the best place in the world - to live, work, and raise a family.
In 2007, Minnesota faced a decade's worth of disasters in a year's time. Spring floods along our western border were followed by

massive forest fires near our northern border. Large portions of Minnesota, including Stearns County, experienced severe drought. In August, we faced the most difficult of challenges: the 1-35W bridge collapse and historic flooding across southeastern Minnesota.
But in the midst of trouble, our state and our nation saw the character and resolve of Minnesotans come shining through. Our prayers, concern, and support continue for those who suffered loss in those heartbreaking events.
Through it all, we saw the strength of Minnesotans.
As Governor, I've seen that strength many times.
I've seen it in the faces of brave military families.
I've seen it in the eyes of cold and tired flood victims absolutely committed to rebuild.
I saw it as a kid growing up In South Saint Paul, when families impacted by mass layoffs at the meat packing plants got back on their feet. I saw it in my own home when my Mom passed away and my Dad got laid off not long after.
And I've seen it in acts of uncommon heroism by regular people, like the 1-35W bridge construction worker who risked his own safety to pull people out of the river with only a broom handle.
Our state is strong even as we are challenged by circumstances.

Minnesotans are understandably concerned about a fragile economy, rising health care and energy costs, making ends meet, and government's never-ending claims on their pocketbooks.
But Minnesota is up to the challenge.
Minnesotans are smart. Minnesotans are creative. Minnesotans are strong.
We have work to do, so let's get started by putting first things first.
The burden of war has fallen hard on the members of our military and their families. In the last year, Minnesota welcomed home more than 3,000 soldiers. We also laid some of our heroes to rest. They gave us their all. Our words and our deeds need to honor their remarkable commitment, courage, and sacrifice.
We've worked together to support members of the military, their families, and veterans. I ask the Legislature to pass the military and veterans package I proposed in November.
Serving others gives life great meaning. We have with us today someone who has led a deeply meaningful life: Lieutenant Colonel John Morris, a chaplain in the Minnesota National Guard, who has spent a lifetime faithfully pastoring others.
He has also poured himself into welcoming soldiers all the way home by designing and leading Minnesota's reintegration effort. Our Beyond the Yellow Ribbon program has become the nation's foremost program for soldiers and their families, and we're so proud of its success.

We're very grateful to Chaplain Morris and deeply appreciate the great care and service he has provided to the men and women in our military. He personifies the meaning of commitment. Please join me in thanking Chaplain Morris.
Our efforts to create a brighter future for Minnesota should also focus on reducing our dependence on foreign oil and producing cleaner energy.
Minnesota should continue to lead efforts to "Americanize" energy production. We must help keep America from becoming an energy hostage to hostile and unreliable leaders like Hugo Chavez, Vladimir Putin, and Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. Homegrown energy will also grow green collar jobs in Minnesota and improve our environment.
This year, I'm asking the Legislature to approve up to 20 million dollars in revenue bonds to fund low interest loans for communities to encourage the installation of micro energy technologies such as home-based solar, next-generation windmills, geothermal heating, and other renewable energy sources .
We also want to maintain our status as the nation's bio-fuels champion. We were the first state in the nation to require that our gasoline contain ten percent ethanol, and we've passed a law to double that.
Four years ago, we harvested the ingenuity of Minnesota farmers and required that our diesel fuel contain two percent soybean oil.

We've improved the product and now let's increase the biodiesel requirement to 20 percent by 2015.
We should also take further steps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. But it's important that our efforts ensure jobs are not lost as a result and that Minnesota does not place itself at a competitive disadvantage.
Clean energy will help our environment and outdoors, and that is a good thing. Enjoying the outdoors is part of who we are as Minnesotans.
We have a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to make even more progress this year by acquiring one of the most breathtaking parcels of undeveloped land left in Minnesota. I propose we purchase 3,000 acres of land along the shores of Lake Vermilion and dedicate it as our first new major state park in 40 years.
I strongly urge the Legislature to seize this historic opportunity to do permanent good.
Some are concerned about funding for this purchase. The Environmental Trust Fund is the ideal funding source. It has a healthy balance and using it will not put further strain on our general fund.
On the broader issue of the general fund, we know the fragile economy is one of the largest challenges facing our citizens.
The economy has slowed down and government's tax collections are now lower than previously projected. Our state budget is in

serious deficit. That deficit will almost certainly be much worse when the new budget forecast is released in a couple of weeks.
As we tackle the deficit, we must remember that Minnesota's hardworking families are already squeezed enough. They're paying more for gas, food, and health care. The last thing they need is government rummaging around in their pockets looking for more. Government must learn to live within its means. We should not add to the burden on Minnesota families by raising their taxes.
Moreover, the well-being of the people we serve depends on their ability to have good-paying jobs. That, in turn, depends upon the willingness of companies to invest, stay, and grow in Minnesota. However, Minnesota's tax policies, job climate, and large government discourage economic growth.
We need to reduce taxes and regulations that discourage job growth, income generation, investment, entrepreneurial activity, . research, and exports. We'll need to do that in a manner that also leaves us with a stable state budget.
Our current tax system reflects the economy and demographics of the 1960s. It's outdated and needs to be fixed.
So I'm announcing that I will create the 21st Century Tax Reform Commission that will recommend tax reforms for our 21st century economy.
Unlike the State Budget Trends Study group that is already underway, this commission will specifically focus on improving

our job climate by reforming Minnesota's tax laws. Job providers, entrepreneurs, private sector employees, investors, and others who actually have direct experience in creating private sector jobs will be members of this commission.
In the meantime, I still have an important tool to restrain taxes and spending. I call it the taxpayer protection pen, otherwise known as the veto pen.
As you know, I will not hesitate to use it to stop government from digging into your wallets.
We should also protect homeowners from unreasonable property tax increases. So once again, I call for Minnesota to join the many states that have capped property taxes.
We also need to support entrepreneurs and small businesses because they are so vitally important to our economy. They create the vast majority of new jobs. That's why I'm asking the Legislature to approve my Strategic Entrepreneurial Economic Development, or "SEED" initiative.
SEED will help new business startups and grow new jobs across Greater Minnesota.
. We must also support our cornerstone industries. Two leading examples are agriculture and mining.
Today, one in five Minnesota jobs are related to agriculture, food processing, agribusiness, or related industries. Minnesota can't be a successful state unless our farmers and agricultural sector is stable and growing.

Commodity prices are pretty good overall and, after some tough . years, our livestock sector is showing some signs of resurgence.
I'm very happy to be the governor of a state with 13,000 more dairy cows than just a few years ago. The state's dairy industry is producing more milk and receiving better prices.
But we can do more.
With fewer and fewer Minnesotans having a direct family connection to the farm, it's important that policymakers take the time to appreciate and promote agriculture in Minnesota, no matter what part of the state we're from.
We can also provide more direct support to farmers in a variety of ways. One way is to continue to support bio-fuels and other forms of farm-grown energy.
Most importantly, we need to help our farmers by doing all we can to keep their input costs such as energy, fuel, regulations, and taxes, as low as possible.
Our mining sector, after a long history of highs and lows, has also rebounded well. The dramatic need for steel in Asia has raised the worldwide demand and price for taconite. That has made Minnesota's mining assets much more valuable. The reinvestment in Minnesota's taconite mines and the resulting increase in jobs and economic activity is terrific.
More companies are planning to bring more jobs to continue this "Iron Range Renaissance." More private investment is taking
place now on the Range than in decades. I look forward to making these projects a reality.
We all agree our future depends upon a modern and efficient transportation system.
We've made strides in this area, including investing more in roads over the last five years than ever before and developing the Northstar rail that we hope will eventually reach Saint Cloud.
Just a few weeks ago, I announced my bonding proposal that includes four times more funding for local roads and bridges than ever before.
I would caution legislators not to delete this important funding from the bill to insert less important projects.
Strong differences of opinion exist regarding transportation funding. But we all agree on one thing - we cannot continue the stalemate that has existed for three decades. I remain hopeful we can overcome the politics and rhetoric of this debate and pass a bipartisan transportation bill this session.
An area of great promise this session is health care.
Our job market, our families, and our government budgets are badly straining under the weighty costs of our health care system.
We need to make health care more affordable.
An excellent discussion has been going on between my administration, legislators of both parties, and health care stakeholders and reformers. I'm hopeful that a bipartisan
agreement will soon be reached to dramatically reform health care in Minnesota.
The heart of the reform is to improve health care productivity and quality by restoring the relationship between doctors and patients.
These days it seems the exam room is crowded with accountants, lawyers and administrators.
The reform will change the way we pay for health care. Currently, we pay doctors for the number of procedures they perform. Instead, we should pay for quality of care and better health care outcomes.
We can also lower costs by encouraging electronic medical records, uniform billing procedures, and by taking more aggressive steps to prevent and treat chronic conditions such as asthma, diabetes, obesity, heart disease, and cancer which account for the vast majority of health care costs.
As these cost containment strategies take hold, savings will be used to help hold down premiums. Some of the savings will also be used to extend health care insurance to more of the uninsured.
Minnesota is the best state in the nation to lead the way on major health care reform. Let's show the country how to do it right.
All of us understand that the most important ticket to the future is the quality of the education our children receive. We should be proud of our Minnesota schools and educators. They have served
us well. Our average student performance is at or near the top in most key measures.
However, we all know those averages don't tell the whole story, and that there is real room for improvement in our schools. There is much to be done, but let me outline a few proposals to help our students and the wonderful educators who dedicate their lives to teach them.
We know the most important indicator of how a child will do in school is the degree to which their parents are effectively engaged in their lives and their education. We should certainly promote, in every conceivable way, parent involvement and parent responsibility.
The second most important factor in determining how children will do in school is the effectiveness of their teachers.
We need to improve teaching and should start by expanding the talent pool for public educators in Minnesota. The teaching profession is no longer consistently attracting top talent through traditional career pathways. Predicted shortages of teachers with needed backgrounds like math and science are beginning to materialize.
Careers no longer progress in traditional or linear fashion in many instances. We need to do more to attract the best talent by encouraging and allowing mid-career professionals to enter the teaching profession with greater ease.
We should also do more to attract the most talented young people to teaching. We need to make it easier for such rising stars with needed subject matter expertise to have an alternative pathway into the profession, even though they may not have majored in education. Part of the attraction for these individuals will be a chance to spend some of their career in public service.
We will have a proposal to begin training a group of these new teachers and get them into the classroom as soon as possible. I am hopeful that the Legislature will support this important effort.
We also need to improve teacher training and evaluation. Rigorous and effective teacher training makes a big difference in student performance, and the current system of ongoing teacher. training needs to be dramatically improved.
Much needs to be done, but let's prioritize by focusing on the area of most acute need and highest impact - training for math and science teachers.
I'm grateful that last year the Legislature included funding for our regional math and science academies. However, we did not receive the amount needed or requested. These academies will give teachers specialized knowledge and enhanced skills that will improve student performance. I am asking that the funding for these academies be increased by 50 percent over the current budget level.
I am also proposing that we design and deploy a world-leading summer training institute for Minnesota's math and science teachers. The institute would feature world-class training In
teaching methods, curriculum, technology, and subject matter mastery.
We should start by training 1,000 teachers over the next two summers. The entire cost would only be a few million dollars, but it will pay big dividends.
We also need to improve teacher evaluation and accountability.
In our current system, teachers have probationary status during their first three years. During that period of time, regular reviews are usually conducted and improvement plans are instituted.
However, once teachers receive tenure status, evaluation and accountability diminish in many districts across Minnesota.
We need to implement a system of post-tenure review. We can design this system in cooperation with the teacher unions, but it must get done. It should include annual evaluations, access to additional training for improvement, and a reasonable amount of time to correct deficiencies.
We also need to come to grips with the fact that most of our kids are leaving our school system in the dust when it comes to use of technology.
The power and efficiency of technology has hardly been tapped in our public K-12 system, but it's transforming almost every other institution and aspect of our lives.
You've heard me speak many times about how our school system needs to become an educational "iPod." We need to offer
children with different backgrounds, learning styles, aptitudes, interests, and learning speeds a semi-customized supplement to their traditional learning environment through technology.
The economies of scale, variety of course offerings, quality control, and student attention-grabbing features of technology will revolutionize education within twenty years. The question for Minnesota is whether we want to lead or follow in this area.
I encourage anyone here to purchase or download one of today's state of the art video games with enhanced graphics and sound. Imagine that power being applied to fourth grade math or tenth grade social studies.
Let's get started by developing a world-class, digitally-stored, always-available, anywhere, anytime, jaw-dropping, eye-popping teaching toolbox accessible to all our teachers and students.
This would not be a state mandated curriculum. Rather, it would be a resource for students, teachers, and districts to use voluntarily to ensure they have access to the highest quality curriculum anywhere. Students could access it to get extra help, complete a course, take an exam, get credit, and speed ahead.
Right behind me, the Mississippi River flows gently by Saint Cloud. About a hundred miles or so north of here, it's a creek you can walk across. More than a thousand miles to the south, it's miles across. It's a river that's always changing, making its way around every obstacle in its path to the sea.
Like our river, Minnesota starts humbly but has an unstoppable forward momentum toward greatness. We're the headwaters state, justly proud of all the amazing things that have started here for 150 yea rs. As the elected leaders of Minnesota, the energy of our people moves us forward. We need to stay within the banks of their values. We need to look downstream and prepare for the challenges we face. And if we do that together, we'll be able to say -- on the far side of all these current troubles - "Well... we made it." May God bless you and may God continue to bless Minnesota for our next great 150 years.
One hundred years ago, John Johnson, another 48-year-old Minnesota governor, returned from the national campaign trail, stood on this very spot and called the state to unity, efficiency and investment.
He dropped dead a few months later.
To my friends in the legislature, you may not be so lucky. My health is good.
So, we'll need to work together to solve the historic challenges confronting our great State. The people we represent are watching, listening, hoping. The challenges we face are so large that we'll need the best ideas and best efforts from across the aisle and across Minnesota.
In just five days, we will inaugurate a talented and optimistic new President, Barack Obama. Our country needs him to succeed. We all wish him well and our prayers are with him.
Today, we're not Democrats. We're not Republicans. We're Minnesotans.
We're all here because we love and care about Minnesota.
Whether it's ice castles or ice fishing; lutefisk or hot dish; the Minnesota Rouser or Purple Rain; going "up north" or playing pond hockey down the street; visiting the world's largest prairie chicken or ear of corn; swapping Ole and Lena jokes or trading real-life stories of how almost every one of us has hit a deer with our car.
Or, maybe it's just the memory of sitting on a dock early in the morning, before the kids get up, with a hot cup of coffee and the lake as still as glass with the only sound being the call of the loon. That's why we love it here. We're a place that enjoys our simple pleasures.

This is Minnesota. Our Minnesota. And we wouldn't trade it for any other place in the world.
But the people we serve are up against a whole new set of difficult challenges, the worst we've seen in a long time. They need and deserve the best leadership and service we here at the Capitol can give them.
By our words and actions, let's not add to the confusion and doubt. Let's give Minnesotans confidence. Let's show them that we understand what they face and that we will make hard choices to lead Minnesota forward. Our challenge this year is not just to close the huge budget deficit. We also have to strategically position Minnesota to thrive in a very different world.
Winston Churchill once said, "If we open a quarrel between the present and the past, we shall be in danger of losing the future."
That pretty well sums up the debate facing Minnesota policy makers.
We're proud of our past and what we've accomplished together in this great State. But we can't be so in love with the past that we miss the future.
An argument between "what was" and "what is" does not prepare us for "what's coming."
We face brand new challenges in a rapidly changing world. The old ways aren't going to cut it anymore.
In Minnesota, we don't have an ocean or a big population or a warm climate, especially this week. Our main resource is us: our intelligence, our creativity, our determination and our self-reliance and most importantly, our common sense. We're going to need those traits now more than ever.
The state of our State is challenged, but overcoming challenges is what Minnesota does best. So let's get at it.
As we begin our work, let's fix an image in our mind.
Imagine a typical Minnesota kitchen table. A mom and dad have just tucked the kids into bed with a kiss and a prayer, and they come back to the table to confront economic reality.

On the table are bills, notices and a notepad with a budget that's tighter than it's ever been. Hope and fear are also at the table.
How do we pay these bills? How do we fix the car? How do we pay this mortgage? How are we going to afford college or even retire someday?
The same emotions, concerns and urgency at that Minnesota kitchen table must be at all the tables we sit at here at the Capitol - the budget hearing table, the agency tables, and the negotiating tables.
And this day, on behalf of Minnesotans sitting at their kitchen tables, I ask each member of the legislature:
Please don't add to their burden by increasing their bill from government.
Please don't take more of their hard earned money.
Please don't raise their taxes.
The couple at the kitchen table begin by setting priorities. What's most important? What can we afford? What do we give up? How can we do things differently? We need to ask and answer the very same questions.
The budget I'll be proposing in just a couple of weeks will rely on significant reductions in state spending, as well as using other resources currently available. The details of that budget will be presented and debated fully very soon. Today, I'm going to focus on the strategic steps Minnesota needs to take to prepare for the future.
We need to start by taking the kitchen table approach and setting priorities.
The highest priority of government is to keep our citizens safe and to make sure we have the capability to protect and defend.
Each day, members of the United States military put on the uniform and then go out and put it all on the line for us. As hard as we think we have it, where would we be without them?

Staff Sergeant Chad Malmberg is a member of the Minnesota National Guard Red Bulls.
While deployed in Iraq in January of 2007, Sergeant Malmberg found himself in the fight of his life. At 27 years old, he was in command of a large convoy when they were ambushed outside of Baghdad by insurgents.
For nearly an hour they took on heavy fire from machine guns and rocket propelled grenades. Outnumbered, Sergeant Malmberg risked his life, going from one vehicle to another to help his soldiers fight back and provide cover. In the midst of this living nightmare, he kept his calm and coordinated ground and air support.
Every soldier's life was saved that day in large part thanks to Sergeant Malmberg and his tremendous courage and leadership.
For his actions, Sergeant Chad Malmberg was the first member of the Minnesota National Guard, since World War II, to be awarded the Silver Star medal.
This is a remarkable story, but there's more. When we held a ceremony to honor Sergeant Malmberg for his heroism, he didn't give a big speech or talk about himself. He came to the podium, asked members of his unit that were with him that fateful day to stand and also be recognized, and then he sat down.
That was it.
That tells you something about his character and his life perspective.
Sergeant Malmberg is with us here today, seated next to the First Lady, in the center gallery behind you. Please join me in thanking and recognizing this remarkable hero.
Sergeant Malmberg and all the members of the military are our heroes and role models, and we must support them however and whenever they need it.
Soon, over 1,000 Minnesota National Guard troops will be taking over the command of 16,000 coalition forces in Iraq. It's just one more example of the amazing work members of the United States Military do day in and day

out. Having the responsibility of a mission like that bestowed upon the Minnesota National Guard is a great tribute to them, to all Minnesota soldiers and to our state.
I'm deeply grateful for all legislators from both parties who have joined our efforts to make Minnesota the most supportive State in the nation for military members and veterans.
My budget this year will maintain our commitments to the members of the military, their families and veterans. I ask for your support in making that a priority again this session.
My budget will also protect state public safety programs and funding, and I'm hopeful the legislature will share that essential priority as well.
Our next priority must be jobs. Having a good job is the quality of life cornerstone for Minnesotans. It's what sustains them, their families, and our communities. And it pays the bills on the kitchen table.
The way to renew our prosperity is to unleash creativity, innovation, entrepreneurship and job growth.
Successful economies are built by people. Our economic landscape is shaped by men and women who see unmet needs and opportunities in the world around them, and devise goods and services to meet them. For all the turmoil in our nation's financial markets, the malfeasance, corruption, and neglected oversight, this truth remains: While government can commission public works, write checks and foster conditions for job growth, it can't match or replace the power of people who create goods, services, and jobs.
The job losses we see across Minnesota are related to a sea change in the national economy. Minnesota is not alone in this crisis, but we do face a unique challenge.
Minnesota has to come to grips with this fact: In 2009, it costs too much for employers to create and keep jobs in this state. If we want to build up employment, we need to bring those costs down. I'm proposing a Minnesota Jobs Recovery Act.

For starters, Minnesota's business tax rate is way too high. A recent study by the Tax Foundation concluded that if Minnesota were a country, we'd have the third highest business tax rates in the world. It's way out of line and it needs to get fixed.
Today, I'm proposing that we cut Minnesota's business tax rate in half. This means reducing the current 9.8 percent business tax rate to 4.8 percent over the next 6 years. This will take us from having one of the worst business tax rates in the country, to having one of the best. It will help us keep and attract more jobs.
We should also remember that small business is the backbone of our economy and has been the source of most of the job growth in the country for a long time.
For those of you who have sought a piece of the American Dream by starting a small business - by hiring your first, your fifth and your tenth employee - and who struggle to survive every day, we thank you, and we salute you.
Many of our small businesses are barely hanging on. In Washington, they're sending billions of dollars to Wall Street. Here in Minnesota, I want us committed to helping Main Street.
These days, lack of financing is a major barrier to small business success. To jump start small business job creation, I've proposed a 50 million dollar package of tax credits that will create over 100 million dollars in new investments.
In addition, I'm proposing a 25 percent refundable tax credit for small business owners that re-invest in their business quickly in order to stimulate our economy.
I'm also proposing a capital gains exemption for qualifying investments in small Minnesota businesses. This will encourage investment in Main Street and help grow jobs.
And here's another thing, companies shouldn't have to do a bunch of paperwork so they can qualify for a bureaucratic rebate from the sales tax

they pay on equipment. Let's just give them a 100 percent exemption from the sales tax - right away when they buy the equipment.
And instead of making these businesses depreciate this equipment over years, let's let them deduct the whole cost right away.
These measures will have immediate impact. They give employers a real incentive to re-invest in their companies and grow jobs.
I know these tax cuts and incentives may seem aggressive in the context of our budget challenges. But we simply have to take dramatic measures to improve our job climate and kick start job growth in Minnesota.
We should also grow jobs by enacting a green jobs initiative. New opportunities in energy from wind, solar, biomass, biogas, geothermal, biofuels and energy conservation are opening a whole new sector of our economy.
Our efforts to increase the use of renewable energy are also paying off.
This fall, the Finnish company Moventas, announced plans to build an 80thousand square-foot plant in Faribault. They'll be making gear boxes for windpower turbines and they selected Minnesota over several other states to do business and grow jobs.
This is another example of Minnesota's growing global influence in renewable energy, particularly windpower. And the tax incentives available through JOBZ played a crucial role.
I've proposed that in addition to JOBZ zones, we create Green JOBZ tax free zones for renewable energy jobs created anywhere in the state. We need more companies like Moventas.
One of our highest priorities must also be to continue to dramatically reform and improve our K-12 education system.
As I said earlier, the quality of life for most Minnesotans depends on their ability to have a good job. Those jobs now and in the future will require our citizens to have a great education and a marketable skill.

Over the last six years, we've improved Minnesota's K-12 education through a series of reforms including: raising our academic standards and graduation requirements; adopting performance pay for teachers through our Q Comp program; upgrading training for our science and math teachers; making more college credit classes available to high school students; and much more.
Minnesota can be proud that we're at or near the top in the country on many education measures. We have the nation-leading ACT scores and our students recently performed among the best in the world in science and math.
But more needs to be done. Our K-12 system is not ready for the future. The success of that system is mission critical to the future success of our state.
Times are tough and our budget crisis is huge. But even at a time like this, we need to increase funding for K-12 schools.
In exchange, we must expect more. My budget will include dramatic reforms and improvements to our K-12 system.
After parents, the quality of teachers is the most important factor in determining student success at school.
A few months ago, I proposed the Teaching Transformation Act to make Minnesota the nation's leader in teacher preparation and training.
We need to aggressively recruit the best and the brightest to become teachers. And we need minimum entrance requirements for teacher preparation programs.
We have minimum requirements for pharmacists, dentists, engineers and just about every other profession. We should have minimum entrance standards for people who do our most important job: educating our children.
The Teaching Transformation Act also strengthens our teacher certification test, requires better teacher preparation programs at our colleges and universities, and more.

We also need to continue to improve and modernize the way we pay teachers.
Minnesota has led the nation in reforming teacher compensation. Our Q Comp program gives school districts more funding if they pay staff for improvements in student learning, rather than just paying for seniority. In these districts, effective teachers get paid more.
This is a common sense program. It pays teachers better for better efforts and better results. And it's paying off.
Three months ago, the Minneapolis School District implemented Q Comp at its 16th site. When they did, Minneapolis Superintendent Dr. Bill Green said: "Q Comp schools have shown real and significant gains in student achievement. Q Comp's focus on improving teacher quality and instructional practice pays off in real gains for all students."
Because every child has a right to a quality education taught by quality teachers, I propose Q Comp be expanded to every corner of our state, every school district and every charter school.
For school districts not currently in Q Comp, this proposal will permanently increase per pupil funding by an amount comparable to a 5 percent increase in the general education funding formula.
While expanding Q Comp is a really important step, we need to do even more.
Our school finance system sends money to schools whether they're doing a good job or not. This isn't how the world works anymore, and it's not in the best interests of student learning or greater accountability.
Let's pay school districts for results. I propose we increase school district funding by up to an additional 2 percent per student for students meeting standards or at least showing reasonable growth towards achievement.
This will align the money we spend with the results we expect. It's common sense. It's how the world works, and it will continue to transform a system that is badly in need of modernization.

We also need to change the way school districts and teacher unions negotiate and settle labor contracts.
The current system is too adversarial, too uncertain and too often places unbearable pressures on school districts to bust their budgets. It also puts the interests of adults ahead of the best interests of children.
We need to bring our process in line with the nearly 40 other states that settle school labor disputes using a fair arbitration process.
This change will not undermine the ability of teacher unions to negotiate hard and receive fair wages. It works well in other states, and it will work here too.
We also need to improve the management of our schools in other ways.
Minnesota has 490 school districts and charter schools, each of which purchase IT, food services, textbooks and supplies. We should require them to come together for bulk purchasing in order to lower costs and eliminate waste.
This will put more money in the classroom, exactly where it belongs.
I'm pleased to be working with a bipartisan group of legislators, including Senator Terri Bonoff and Representative Ryan Winkler on this important step.
Of course, the need for education reform is not limited to K-12. For several years we've driven reform and innovations in higher education with incentive funding.
But our current higher education system must find even more ways to become more efficient and less focused on geography and bricks and mortar.
It's time our colleges and universities move more aggressively to deliver more of their courses online. From paying bills, and buying airline tickets, to keeping up with friends, much of our lives are now online.
A couple of months ago I met Gina Drellack, a mother of two who earned her degree from Bemidji State University -- online. She was able to take
classes at times and places that were convenient to her, including at her kitchen table. It was flexible, modern and efficient. As a result, she was able to keep her family as a top priority and maintain employment at the same time. She graduated about a year ago, and credits online learning with helping to transform her life.
I know online courses won't replace some needed face-to-face education and hands-on experience, and we don't want it to. But our higher education story needs to look and sound a lot more like Gina's story. The higher education marketplace is clearly and undeniably moving in that direction. The only question will be whether Minnesota leads or follows.
That's why I've challenged Minnesota's state college and university system to deliver 25 percent of their credits online by 2015. I'm grateful MnSCU's board and leadership have accepted the challenge and appreciate the progress they have made to this point. I also appreciate the University of Minnesota's efforts in this area.
To help our younger students get ready for this future, I've proposed that our state high school graduation standards require every student to participate in an online experience by the time they graduate.
This year, I'm also asking that we add a new element of cost accountability for higher education. It's this: we should impose a firm cap on tuition increases. Otherwise, the necessary changes in higher education we will make this session will fall too heavily on students and their families.
Next, we need to deal with the second largest part of our budget: health and human services.
As we all know, Minnesota's programs in this area have become unreasonably expensive and their cost is unsustainable.
The budget forecast shows these programs will go up nearly 19 percent if left unchecked.
We must slow down the rate of spending growth in these programs or it will eliminate our ability to fund other priorities in the future. As my budget will reflect, there is no easy way to do this. But, in the midst of these changes, we will protect all current health care eligibility for children.
My next priority is to reform the way government does business.
Workers in the private sector are facing big layoffs, big pay cuts and sharply reduced hours. Government employees will experience layoffs too. However, we should do what we can to minimize them and a wage freeze will help. I'm proposing we freeze all state government wages for the next two years.
I'm also proposing that we enact legislation to require a wage freeze for any Minnesota government entity that accepts state money.
Here's another way we're going to reform the business of government.
Our system of 87 different county governments was designed for a different era. Most county functions are duplicated 87 times over, to the detriment of taxpayers. I'm not proposing to eliminate counties. But I am proposing that we save money by encouraging counties to work together.
We should incentivize counties to create, join and operate no more than 15 new regional enterprises that will manage and run all human service programs so each county doesn't have to run their own.
We should also require local units of government to use the leverage of the state's buying power to purchase commodities such as road salt, paper and IT services at a reduced price, unless they can find a better price themselves.
It's no secret that funding for cities and counties is going to have to be reduced to close our budget deficit. Since it's not secret we're not going to send them as much money, we need to help them in other ways. We should reduce or eliminate as many state mandates as possible. We should also allow townships, cities or counties to opt-out of some state mandates by vote of their governing body.
I want to particularly thank the Association of Minnesota Counties for their vision in redefining the county-state relationship. It's a bold plan and we look forward to continuing to work with them during the session.
And county lines are not the only political boundaries that need to be crossed.
Wisconsin Governor Jim Doyle and I have been working together to find state government operations that can be combined or coordinated to save money in both states.
You often hear the reference about when "the lion will lay down with the lamb." Well how about this: in the near future ... the Gopher will lie down with the Badger.
As I close, let's go back to that Minnesota kitchen table. Yes, there's fear and worry at that table, but there's also hope, and optimism. In our own modest way, Minnesotans have a confidence that we can find a way and make it work. We always have.
A few miles from here is the College of St. Catherine, the largest women's college in America. Sister Antonia McHugh built this college from almost nothing. She was raised on the prairie at the turn of the last century. And, like many Minnesotans before and since, the things she learned in the joys and rigors of rural life gave her the skills to become a great leader.
Listen to her words describing the pioneers who came before her:
"The soul of a pioneer woman is a beautiful thing.... full of wisdom and hope and self-sacrifice.... [They] saw visions and dreamed dreams while they were facing the bare realities.... They had faith in the new land, and faith made them zealous."
As we face bare realities, we need that same faith in the future. We need to find that same wisdom and hope and willingness to sacrifice in ourselves. And like generations before us, we need help from our Creator.
As Abraham Lincoln said, without God's help, we cannot succeed, and with His help, we cannot fail.
May God bless you all and may God continue to bless the great state of Minnesota.
This state of the state address is not the most important thing that happened in Minnesota this week - not by a long shot.
The most important thing that happened this week is that our Red Bulls of the Minnesota National Guard came home.
Let me tell you what they did. This was the first time since World War II that a National Guard unit from any state was given complete command authority for such large military activities in a war zone.
They were given this awesome mission for one reason: they are the best.
If all of us as Minnesotans, in whatever our responsibilities, and whatever our challenges, can reflect even a fraction of their spirit, dedication, courage, and strength, Minnesota will continue to be one of the most remarkable places the world has ever known.
I'd also like to recognize and thank each public servant here today. Holding public office is a high honor. But honor has its sacrifices, which your families also bear.
To them and to you: thank you for serving the good people of Minnesota.
To those here today who hope to be Governor next year - I have a few tips for all of you.
First, schedule a monthly haircut to manage your mullet.
Second, try to make sure the person who is responsible for representing your positions in court, the Attorney General, is also not your re-election opponent.

Third, don't kiss an eelpout on the lips, even if the locals say it's for good luck.
Fourth, before you take the microphone at a Minnesota Wild game, carefully practice pronouncing the word "puck."
But seriously and most importantly, make sure you have a patient, kindhearted, smart, and wonderfully supportive spouse. Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in recognizing and thanking the First Lady of Minnesota, Mary Pawlenty, for her great work on behalf of our state.
Today, the state of our state is challenged, but our spirit is resilient.
Way back in 1832, explorer Henry Schoolcraft completed his quest and discovered the true source of the Mississippi River.
As we gather here today, we're also on a quest. We're looking for the true source of economic recovery.
That's what I want to talk to you about today.
The true source is not bigger government, special interests, or political parties. The true source is good jobs for our people.
We all want to maintain Minnesota's quality of life. But the term "quality of life," and all that it implies, is an empty boast if people don't have jobs.
Today, many Minnesotans live with uncertainty and fear because ofthe historically awful economy.
Many have been robbed of their dreams by the mistakes or recklessness of others. They're not statistics; they're people dealing with heartbreaking misfortune.
As some of you know, I grew up in South St. Paul. It was a town that depended on mammoth meatpacking plants and the world's largest stockyards to provide good jobs.
But the meatpacking industry changed, and the plants shut down. The massive job loss and crushing impact on families and the community was

frightening, even to those of us who were just kids.
When I was still in high school, my mom died and a few years later my dad lost his job at a trucking company. At first, I was scared and confused.
I felt bad for my dad. He was a decent and hardworking guy who asked for nothing more than the chance to do right by his family.
Many Minnesota moms and dads, and their children, are experiencing those types of feelings now.
So, the most important question before us is this: how do we best grow good, private sector jobs in Minnesota?
The people who can best answer that question aren't in this room. They're not in Congress. They're not in the White House. They're not in bureaucracies. In fact, they're usually not in government or politics at all.
The people who best know how to create jobs are the people who have actually done it.
If government listens to them, this is what it'll hear loud and clear: "Get out of our way. Leave us alone. Make it easier, not harder."
The message is clear, so let's get to work. For starters, it's plainly obvious that Minnesota's tax system is not even close to competitive. It was established in a different era for a different economy by politicians that most likely couldn't envision the hypercompetitive world of today. It's almost pre-Sid Hartman thinking.
Thankfully, we've made some progress by achieving a decades-long goal of getting Minnesota out of the top ten states in taxes.
We've dramatically slowed down state government spending.
And even in this economy, we've seen Minnesota's GDP grow more than 25% during my time in office.
While our unemployment rate is too high, it's significantly below the national average.

But, the bad news is Minnesota's business tax climate is the 8th worst in the nation. That means 42 other states have a competitive edge on Minnesota.
We have the 3rd highest corporate tax rate in the developed world. Our personal income and sales tax rates are among the highest in the country, . and Minnesota offers no preferential rate for capital gains.
We need to face the facts: Minnesota's tax system is costing us jobs, and our tax code needs to change to meet the challenges and opportunities of our time.
So, today, I urge the legislature to pass my Jobs Creation Bill that has six vital parts: 1. A 20% reduction in the corporate tax rate; 2. A 20% exclusion from taxation for small businesses; 3. An angel investment tax credit; 4. A supercharged research and development tax credit; 5. A capital gains exclusion for qualified investments; and 6. Incentives for companies to invest in Minnesota small businesses.
These steps will encourage job growth and send a strong signal that Minnesota is moving in a more pro-growth, pro-jobs direction.
These are important steps, but many more will be needed this year, and in the years to come, if Minnesota is going to be truly competitive in a changing economy.
One thing we can, and should do now, is improve and renew the JOBZ program. It's needed and it works.
Let me give you an example.
A few years ago, Minnesota Twist Drill in Chisholm was planning to leave the state. A few employees bought the company.
Using JOBZ and some other tools, they kept the company here and have more than doubled employment to 130 jobs in an area that desperately needs them.

We should also use a tool like this as part of an effort, along with local partners, to keep making cars or trucks in Saint Paul. Seven-hundred-fifty hardworking people at the Ford plant want to keep their jobs and we should do all we can to help them.
I am asking the legislature to pass my plan to create a "CARZ" zone at the Ford Plant that will offer tax incentives similar to the JOBZ program..
Here's the next thing: we need to reduce government spending because it leads to job-killing tax increases.
From 1960, the year I was born, until I became Governor in 2003, state government spending increased an average of21 % every two years. That's outrageous and unsustainable by any measure.
During my time as Governor, we've dramatically slowed down state government spending and we actually cut spending for the first time in Minnesota's history!
Most states outpacing Minnesota in job growth from 2003 to the crash of 2008 spent less, not more, per capita, on government. The few exceptions were states with sparse population or unique circumstances.
It's a no brainer. Companies make common sense decisions to grow and add jobs where it costs less.
Minnesota is accustomed to a very different model. For generations, most Minnesota politicians wanted more taxes because they wanted more government, and they got it.
They believed the presumed benefits of big government outweighed the big tax burdens placed on our citizens and job providers.
In Minnesota, this doesn't just apply to Democrats. Let's be fair about it.
This approach has endured under the leadership of previous governors and legislators from all parties, with only modest exceptions, until now.
Many have argued that was a good approach and they believe the way forward is the way backwards. My friends, it's not.

We can't afford all of the spending that's been promised and expected, even if we return to normal economic growth.
Times have changed and there's no going back.
I know this will be debated here over the next few months, and the election this fall will settle the issue in the near term.
. In the long term, however, competitive forces will decide this issue, as they always do. The future will demand that Minnesota compete or be left behind.
One thing we can do right now is fix Minnesota's budget process.
The way we budget today is backwards. Around here, we decide how much to spend before we know how much we'll take in.
That's why I am calling for a constitutional amendment to require that future spending commitments not exceed revenues currently collected.
We should spend only what we have, not what we hope to have.
That's a common sense approach understood at every kitchen table in Minnesota.
We also need to reduce spending at all levels of government, not just the state level. The property tax caps we passed a couple years ago are helping, but they expire after next year. Let's make those property tax caps permanent.
We also must balance the state's budget. Unlike the federal government, our constitution requires it. As difficult as it will be, we simply must make it happen.
As each day goes by, it becomes much harder because our options narrow dramatically. Think of this: The state spends about $43 million from the general fund each day. At this point, we're spending $2.3 million more per day than we receive in revenue.
We must act decisively and quickly.

I know the unallotments I made last summer are controversial. But, to bring needed certainty and stability to our budget during this epic crisis, I'm asking the legislature to ratify those decisions. Those unallotments simply cannot be restored at this point.
On Monday, you'll see my plan to solve the additional budget deficit identified in the November budget forecast. It will include very dramatic and painful spending reductions. While programs for the military, veterans, core public safety functions and K-12 classrooms will be protected, nearly all other areas will be proposed for reduction.
The reaction to my budget proposals from most of the people in this room will be predictable. Fair enough. I look forward to your alternative proposals.
Again, each day that goes by means more options are taken off the table, the hole is dug deeper and the problem gets much harder to solve. There may come a point where lack of action will make it nearly impossible to solve the problem if we don't act soon.
Beyond controlling government spending and reforming our tax code, we can do even more to improve Minnesota's economy and create jobs.
In business, time is money and delay impacts a company's ability to compete.
The good news is my administration has dramatically cut the wait time for environmental permits. But we can do more.
This week, I issued additional directives to state agencies that will streamline Minnesota's permitting process and speed things up even further.
Attracting new businesses and creating good jobs also depends on a well-educated and skilled workforce.
Many of our students are doing very well. But let's face the facts:.too many are not. We've enacted nation-leading reforms to improve our schools, but we must do more.

Persistently low achieving schools need new leadership, new authority, and new teachers hired and assigned based on performance, not seniority.
These changes occur most frequently when mayors are in control of a large urban school districts or when alternative school models are used.
I support giving mayors the accountability and full control, and I mean full control, of the Minneapolis and St. Paul school districts. Short of that, however, I've directed the Department of Education to use existing authority to create an Office of Turnaround Schools and make the changes I've just described.
We also know the most important school-related factor in determining how a student will perform is the quality and preparedness of their teachers.
Now, I know the teacher unions don't like it, but I again plead with you to pass the "Teaching Transformation Act." It will dramatically improve teacher quality, training, and accountability for results.
I am also asking the legislature to reform teacher tenure.
Everybody knows the current tenure system is a public policy fossil. Tenure should be renewed every five years, and it should be based on evaluations linked to student performance.
Teaching is an honorable and indispensable profession. But we don't raise its value by lowering our standards.
We also know that we can't grow jobs if health care costs are pushing companies, families, and governments towards bankruptcy. The good news is that Minnesota has led the way in health care reform, and I'm proud we have. '
Minnesota has become the most consumer-centered health care market in the country. We've taken the lead in providing consumers with information about health care costs and quality.
Minnesota is also leading the country in paying for better health outcomes rather than just the volume of procedures. We're moving from a system of "sick care" to a real "health care" system.

We also have the highest usage of health savings accounts of any state.
I ask the legislature to take yet another step toward improving the affordability and quality of our health care system.
Three plans control almost all the health care market in Minnesota. We have little real choice when selecting our health insurance.
We live in a world where we can buy almost anything from anywhere, anytime on the Internet. Why not health insurance?
I propose that state law be changed to give consumers the choice to buy health insurance across state lines.
We also need to overhaul our publicly subsidized health care system. Its costs are out of control.
Most Minnesotans who have private health insurance are rewarded for shopping smart for their health care. If it's expected for us as taxpayers, then the taxpayers should expect the same from those we help on public assistance.
I urge the legislature to pass our proposals to reform MinnesotaCare and Medical Assistance.
Beyond these important measures, we can make bipartisan progress on a number of other problems.
For example, we should improve public safety by cracking down on drunk drivers by enacting my proposal which makes it clear: "If you don't breathe, you don't leave."
We should get dangerous sexual predators off our streets by doubling their prison sentences.
We should improve our democratic process by ensuring our deployed military members can vote on time.
We should also enact a bonding bill, provided it's affordable, reasonable and

focused.
I look forward to working with the members of the legislature on these and other matters.
But, we should always remember our first priority is good jobs.
We've all experienced the so-called "Minnesota goodbye" - where the guest announces they're leaving multiple times before they actually do, It can often start at a table, move to the front door, then the front yard, and even move down the driveway with multiple hugs along the way. At its finest, it concludes with a goodbye shouted through a car window as the guest drives away.
I'll try to avoid that ritual as I leave this office in 11 months, but I do have just a few more things to say.
Minnesotans have our little quirks. But we count our blessings by what's really at our core - the character of our people and our magnificent natural splendor.
Visitors sometimes don't understand the love we have for this place. They think of it as cold, far from oceans, and a place that even airplane pilots can miss altogether.
But for those of us who live here, we understand the common sense and uncommon beauty that make our state something special.
Now, it's true, Minnesotans have to worry about such things as whether the ice will be off the lake in time for the fishing opener, kicking asteroid size ice chunks from the wheel well of our cars, and training the next generation to endure the ritual of falling madly in love with the Vikings, only to be . dumped at the altar of the Super Bowl.
We get excited at the arrival of spring, when we can once again fire up the lawnmower and the grill.
We enjoy our summer trips to the Dairy Queen with the kids. We like . bicycle rides around lakes and long, slow evenings next to a bonfire with family and friends.
But for all the reasons we love Minnesota, let's remember the real miracle of Minnesota is the goodness of our people.
Let me share an amazing example of this amazing Minnesota spirit: the St. Sauver family of Pierz, Minnesota.
Even for Joe Mauer it's a big deal to bat 5 for 5 in a ball game.
But the St. Sauver family has gone 6 for 6 in service to our state and country.
All six members of their family serve the military - and all of us - in some capacity.
Lt. Col. Scott St. Sauver leads the Minnesota National Guard's 151 Field Artillery Battalion currently deployed in Iraq. He is on his second tour in five years.
His wife, Deb, works at the Camp Ripley Family Assistance Center, where she helps Guard members and their families before, during, and after a Guard member is deployed.
Scott and Deb are incredibly proud of their four children and so are we. Chris, Anthony, Blake and Ashley all followed their father's example and each one of them joined the National Guard.
Service to a cause greater than themselves is a way of life for Minnesotans and the St. Sauver family. Everyone of St. Sauvers insists there's nothing extraordinary about what they do.
I beg to differ.
Please join me in showing our appreciation to our veterans, military members and their families by recognizing Deb St. Sauver, and Staff Sergeant Anthony St. Sauver, who are seated in the gallery.
We govern in challenging times, but Minnesota has faced challenges before. Our state has seen it all and been through it all. And Minnesotans always rise to the challenge.
Let me give you an example: During the Great Depression, one of the great job creators in Minnesota's history emerged - Curt Carlson. He was a man of boundless energy and unquenchable enthusiasm. He had an amazing ability to see opportunity even in the most dire circumstances.
Curt Carlson started his career delivering newspapers and eventually created a Minnesota company that is now known and respected around the world. Today, Carlson Companies employ 3,500 people in our state and 150,000 globally.
His personal motto would be a great approach for all of us to take into the. challenges we face. He said: "Whatever you do, do with integrity. Wherever you go, go as a leader. Whomever you serve, serve with caring. Whenever you dream, dream with your all. And never, ever, give up."
That's good advice, but above and beyond economic growth and jobs, we must always remember there's something even more important.
It's captured in the very first words of the Minnesota Constitution:
"We, the people of Minnesota, grateful to God for our civil and religious liberty, and desiring to perpetuate its blessings and secure the same to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this constitution."
These words were written by pioneers and adventurers who faced dangers and uncertainty far greater than our own.
Let's be thankful to God for our liberty.
Be grateful for His many blessings, especially in challenging times.
And continue to trust the goodness and the resilience of Minnesotans.
These truths will carry us forward to a better Minnesota.
They always have and they always will.
May God bless you and may God continue to bless the great State of Minnesota.
