Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chief Justice, Associate Justices, Members of the 7lst Minnesota State Legislature, Fellow Constitutional Officers, Governors, distinguished guests and good friends.
As I have thought about your return to the Capitol and the beginning of this second session of the 7lst Minnesota Legislature, I have tried to sort out the significance of the work we begin.
When we have Russia perched on the border of Iran --
When we have worldwide apprehensions about a shaky economic future --
When night after night for 81 consecutive nights, we have heard the television report that begins "America held hostage."



In a world seemingly caught up in fear and hate and greed, what is the meaning of our actions over the next few months? Do they even matter? Do they have any lasting significance? Do they make any difference at all?

I would guess there are some lonely moments when each of you have asked yourself the same haunting questions and maybe there are times when the answers do not come clearly or don't come at all.

But upon some genuine soul searching, I have come to see that what we do in the days ahead is the very heart of all the international issues. In a very real sense, this is the battleground No, I am not talking about our partisan disputes-- the skirmishes between the House and Senate, Republican and Democrat, the legislative and executive -- these squabbles pale in the light of the larger concern. No, this is the battleground where we test, where we prove that a self-governing society is worth the sacrifice. Here is where we demonstrate that a free people have the discipline, the drive, the sense of purpose



to solve their problems. As I think about the importance of our work over the next few months, John Gardner's words keep coming back to me: "This free society begins with us. It must not end with us."

It will not, if we act responsibly, if we take control of our lives, if each of us realizes that we have tasks to perform, whether we be in government, business, education, civic organizations or within our families. The problems that confront this nation and this state do not fall exclusively on government or solely to the private sector. The issues on our agenda call on every person, every institution -- without exception.

Nowhere is that more apparent than in the energy issue. Just look at what Minnesotans are doing.

The Twin City Carpenters District Council, with the support of the Minnesota AFL-CIO, has volunteered to amend its rules on the apprentice-journeyman relationship so they can help the state's effort in weatherizing homes. with labor's help and CETA's workers, we can vastly increase the rate at which we weatherize our homes.



The Minnesota Business Partnership, an organization of the 50 largest companies in the state, representing over 10%. of our employees, is promoting ridesharing, vanpooling and other transit options as a means of getting employees to and from work conveniently at less cost to the worker and greater savings for all.

According to a sample of its members, the Minnesota Association of Commerce and Industry reports that nearly one~half of the firms have made extensive conservation efforts.

Public affairs organizations, such as the Citizens League, the Upper Midwest Council and the Urban Coalition all are contributing to the development of new ideas.

Local governments in Minnesota have taken some dramatic initiatives. That is clearly evident here in St. Paul. Moorhead has developed a comprehensive energy policy for municipal government operations.. New Ulm is planning a campaign to distribute conservation literature to every household in the city. Nine Iron Range communities and



the Arrowhead Economic Opportunity Agency are cooperating on a waste-elmwood program to debark elmwood and to distribute it for home heating fuel.

Hosts of individuals have silently done their part to conserve, as well.

This is the kind of spirit that lives in a free, creative, dynamic self-governing society. This is the kind of resilience Americans have. While there may be those on foreign shores who predict that the energy crisis will be our downfall, I predict it will be the issue that demonstrates to all the world the deep strength and true endurance of the American people.

We in state government also have a part to play. As I see it, the state has seven responsibilities in dealing with the energy issue.

First, it has to set an example. We cannot squander if we expect others to save.



Last spring, I asked state agencies to reduce over the next year the business miles driven by state employees by 10%. And we will meet that goal -- a reduction of four million miles. By buying smaller cars we improve our mileage anywhere from 11% to 28%.

You set aside $4 million for retrofitting state buildings. This session, I am asking for another $2.7 million. This $6.7 million investment will more than pay for itself in five years.

Second, the state should influence federal priorities. If the federal government attempts to heat southern swimming pools rather than northern homes, we must protest. If the federal government uses a system of energy aid which dispenses checks automatically, regardless of need for fuel assistance, we must protest. If these checks provide fuel assistance to those in prison, in nursing homes and on tropical islands, we must protest. If we have learned anything from the federal government's recent fiasco, it is that this state government



cannot afford either in terms of dollars or public confidence -- to enter into a statewide system of energy support which automatically dispenses money, regardless of energy needs and without an individualized and personalized review.

While Minnesota received approximately $79 million this year from the federal government, we may receive well over $100 million next year.

Consequently, my energy proposals are designed to take care of the unique needs of Minnesotans and at the same time capitalize on the infusion of expected federal dollars which should make a permanent state program unnecessary or at least greatly reduce it in scope.

In the upcoming months, as ~hese federal programs start to take shape, we will develop a state plan for the expenditure of those dollars, a plan which will be due in October or November 1980. This session we should realize that developing a coordinated energy program with federal and local government will be an evolving process.

Third, the state in cooperation with the federal government must help our needy citizens meet their energy costs.

Federal programs this winter will assist those with incomes up to 125% of poverty. Minnesota can and should do more. We should assist those with incomes between 125 and 150% of poverty -- and do so on a sliding scale.

I know some legislators believe we should extend the state's help to those with higher incomes. No matter where we draw the line, it will no doubt seem unfair to those just beyond it. We must be wise enough to strike the delicate balance between providing assistance to those who need it and recognizing the circumstances of those who not only have to pay their own costs but have to be taxed to assist others.

I propose that we continue the state crisis fuel program operating since October. This program gives the opportunity to obtain fuel to anyone who needs it but has no liquid assets to purchase fuel.



To meet the rising costs of fuel faced by-school districts, I am recommending an additional $12.4 million for transportation aid in 1980 and 1981. This item will be financed by the projected cancellations under the foundation- aid formula.

Fourth, the state must encourage everyone to undertake conservation efforts. One of the first places to start is in the home.

We've all heard the figure that approximately 30% of the heat in a home can be lost through the roof because of inadequate insulation. A 1979 survey indicated that 12% of Minnesota homes did not have any insulation at all and another 55% had less than 6 inches, or half the recommended level. Weatherizing these homes would result in significant energy savings.

I am proposing $11 million for additional weatherization grants. This proposal is in addition to the $45 million in loans for home improvements which will be available from February 1 to December 31. This program administered by the Housing Finance Agency is, I understand, the largest loan program in any state.

Besides our homes, another place we can encourage conservation is in our neighborhoods. Some of this is already beginning. In St. Paul, I know, there are neighborhoods where people are cooperating as a neighborhood organization to arrange for plowing of alleys, collecting of refuse.and repairing or insulating of homes. I believe that inventive people could also find new ways in neighborhoods to arrange for the delivery of other services that relate to energy conservation.

Certainly if there were a major crisis in oil supply, we would depend heavily on people to work out cooperative ways where they live to get each other to work, to the store and to church.

I hope that city councils and mayors will cooperate with these neighborhood efforts and encourage them.

The state itself can cooperate with cities in other ways.

I am requesting that the state participate with St. Paul and Northern States Power Company in a proposed district heating program. This could well serve as a model for other Minnesota communities. I have requested that you appropriate $2.7 million for our share of the initial' capital costs.

Furthermore, I believe that local government should be authorized to levy one-mill over levy limits specifically for energy conservation.

One of the most promising energy conservation measures the state can promote is ridesharing and vanpooling. We must encourage a more limited reliance on the single occupant car, especially for trips to and from work. For example, in the metropolitan area the MTC does a good job in feeding the central cities, but more than half of the jobs in the metro area are located in places that are not and could not realistically be provided for by bus system.



Because of the great potential for substantial energy savings in ridesharing and vanpooling, I am recommending $1.5 million which will provide us with a 15% tax credit for employer-sponsored vanpools, an expansion of the state fleet, an expansion of ridesharing and an increased enforcement of the 55 mi1e-per-hour speed limit. These actions could save Minnesota an estimated 52 million gallons of gas every year.

Fifth, the state government must seek to assure an uninterrupted supply of fuel. This is particularly critical for us because 60% of the crude oil used by the state's four refineries comes from Canada which is planning to phase out its crude oil exports to the United States. New crude pipelines are needed quickly -- one from the west and one from the south, and we will continue to push for them.

The sixth responsibility the state has is to encourage alternative energy sources. Minnesota has many possibilities to increase our use of renewable resources. I have asked for $1.3 million for this purpose next year.



This proposal provides for a gasohol demonstration program for farm-scale production operated by the University of Minnesota Department of Agricultural Engineering, a fuelwood management program, and a state alternative energy contingency account to provide state participation in wind resources, biomass-wetlands agriculture, and agricultural residue projects when non-state funds are committed for the demonstration projects.

The final obligation of the state is to inform the public about our choices. Government obviously cannot. do this alone and I want to note in particular the excellent work the media in Minnesota has done in helping the people understand the energy problem. A good job. The state must expand its efforts in public information, energy education and encouraging community support. I am requesting $1.3 million to be invested in this effort.

The energy program I have outlined includes assistance to our people, our schools and our cities. In addition, the state itself will require $9 million to cover its increased fuel costs. Together, these recommendations total $56.6 million.



During the past several months, I have traveled extensively and listened carefully to our people. I have attempted to prepare an energy package which has their support. As our energy ideas are discussed in these halls, I would anticipate much agreement. There may be different views as to how the state should integrate its efforts with the federal government, but we should not let our differences overshadow our common goals.

On the wall of the Senate Majority Leader's office hangs a sign with a Will Rogers' quote: "If we need wood, we chop down a tree. If we need oil, we dig a hole. If we want steam, we dig for coal. When we run out of these, we'll find out how good we are."

I think we are good to adapt and -- yes job done.

good enough to conserve, to innovate, good-enough to cooperate to get the

It is paradoxical that at the same time we ask people to reduce their travel and use less gas, the state is hurt by such action through its loss of revenue from the gas tax.



The costs of maintaining and constructing our roads have increased dramatically. The receipts to fund these programs have gone down. As a result, 61 highway projects totaling $122 million have already been deferred. If nothing is done this session, another $150 million in deferrals is possible. It is further projected that we will have a shortfall in revenues amounting to $300 million in 1982-83 and $450 million for 1984-85.

The choice is simple.

We can either invest now and protect the $16 billion we have put into our road system, or we can allow the deterioration of that network which will ultimately impair the economic future of Minnesota.

Over the past months, I have explored many options to fund our transportation network. I have sought to develop a balanced proposal to raise the necessary revenues. The highway funding package that I submit to you has four basic elements.

First, I propose a 4% sales tax on gasoline, the same percentage as our general sales tax. The tax would be on the pump price of gas less existing state and federal taxes.

The second part of my proposal is to cut the existing 9 cents per gallon state tax on gasoline to 7 cents. The combination of these two actions will make the overall tax more inflation sensitive.

Let me stop here a moment to try to clear up some confusion which has surrounded this proposal. Some have asked how is this recommendation consistent with my long standing commitment to indexing. I am extremely proud of the indexing we accomplished last session.



But indexing does not prevent the income tax you pay from rising with inflation, it simply prevents your tax payments from rising faster than inflation. Likewise, the revenues from Minnesota's 4% sales tax rise with inflation.

The third element of my proposal would authorize $150 million in general obligation bonds to be used over the next five years for the state's share of interstate highway funding. Interstate construction is funded 90% by the federal government. Minnesota's failure to raise the remaining 10% would result in our forfeiting the federal share.

The last element of my proposal is to shift the 4% excise tax on motor vehicle sales from the general fund to the highway fund. This transfer would begin on July 1 of 1981 and would begin with 25% of the excise tax being allocated to highways. In each of the succeeding three years an additional 25% would be transferred from the general fund, reaching 100% in 1984.



If we are to keep jobs in Minnesota, we must keep up our roads.

Environment We've talked about conserving energy in Minnesota, conserving and maintaining our roads -- but equally as important is conserving our natural resources.

Stewardship of our natural environment is a God-given responsibility. Again the responsibility falls on each one of us as you will see in the following initiatives:

I will call a State Environmental Conference this year to allow maximum public participation in a comprehensive review that I want undertaken. This review will focus on the state's role in environmental matters which is spread over some 85 programs.

-- I have prepared five bills for your consideration which will help focus the work of the Environmental Quality Board on the more significant issues and streamline the process of environmental reviews. There are too many delays and burdensome paperwork requirements now involved in the process.



I will support legislation to continue the work begun by the Water Planning Board when its legislative authority again terminates at the end of this fiscal year by incorporating those responsibilities under the Environmental Quality Board.

-- I have asked our state agencies to pursue with mining interests and the citizens most affected, how best to manage the development of our huge potential in copper and nickel and to address uranium exploration -- doing all of that while staying within sound environmental guidelines.

-- I have determined that an independent assessment of the safety of Minnesota's nuclear power plants should be undertaken. Thus, I have appointed a Nuclear Safety Committee. They have begun a comprehensive review of the safety of nuclear power plants and will, by April 1980, report to me their recommendations.



-- I will work in harmony with the Joint Legislative Committee on Solid and Hazardous Waste to discover answers to the safe disposal of an estimated 128,000 tons of hazardous waste per year. My preference is that those companies producing the waste should assume the primary responsibility for disposing it. If government action is necessary, the counties involved should next get into the act. Then, only if required, the State should enter the disposal siting picture and look first at the suitability of land already owned by the State. Throughout this process of locating and using disposal sites, regardless of sponsorship, the State will monitor the environmental impacts.

-- In the area of solid waste, I will support legislation that places the responsibility of planning and siting waste disposal areas at the county level. Equally important, the legislation must be tied closely to resource recovery programs.

Three weeks ago, I transmitted to the Legislature a Report on Environmental Quality. This report will allow everyone to see the wide range, complexity and urgency of dozens of environmental challenges facing Minnesota.



I will continue to work with you on the many environmental issues which we now know will be a constant public concern for as long as we inhabit this earth.

As I look at the priorities before us -- energy, transportation, environment -- I am optimistic that this can be a productive legislative session -- and hopefully a short one.

To that end, I have purposely limited my address today to major issues.

My concerns go beyond these limited number of issues. My legislative proposals, covering numerous topics from aid to the hearing impaired to agricultural promotion, are drafted in bill form, being readied for introduction.
You will also be receiving a statement on community development on February 7.



Today, you will receive the detailed description of my energy proposals for the 1980 session.

Budget You will also receive later today my supplemental budget recommendations. Let me simply summarize the budget highlights

The Department of Finance has projected a general fund balance of $84.7 million. $6.9 million will be used for salary increases due to the automatic cost of living increases. $4 million is dedicated to the capital budget. Proposed legislation accounts for $2.8 million and budget supplements amount to $10.1 million. My energy proposals will use $44.2 million from the projected balance plus $12.4 million of projected cancellations which I mentioned earlier for a total of $56. million for energy related assistance.

This will leave us $21 million as a protection against our income projections not being realized. For a $7.4 billion dollar biennial budget, that measure of protection represents only 3/10ths of 1%. It is prudent to maintain such a reserve for there are no attractive alternatives for cutting state spending in the final months of a fiscal year.
I believe the state can make substantial progress on these key issues within those budget constraints. Such progress would be a good record for any legislative session but this time, in this session, the people expect more from us. They care about this system of government and they want to see it work -- and if it can, they want to see it work better.

There are improvements needed in state government. Improvements that have the overwhelming support of the people of this state. And because of that, they cannot be ignored.
Therefore, I am proposing that the Legislature approve four constitutional amendments.



Since I have spoken out on these proposals extensively in the last month, I will not elaborate on them now'. I am conscious of the fact that one should not begin what is hoped to be a very short session with a very long speech.

First, I am proposing an amendment for initiative and referendum. Because I believe so strongly that citizens ought to be enabled to participate directly in the passage and repeal of laws, I made initiative and referendum the subject of my first campaign position paper in March of 1978. The proposal has been drafted in a manner which ensures that any petition would first have to have substantial support of citizens in all counties before it would come before the voters.

Second, I propose an amendment to require a 60% vote of
both houses of the Legislature to increase taxes. In the
past, taxes have been increased without adequate attention
having been given to their effects. An increase in taxation
should require a stronger consensus of the Legislature than
is now necessary as is the case with bonding decisions.



Third, I propose an amendment to limit increases in state spending. By limiting increases in state spending to the rate of growth in non-farm personal income, we can impose a discipline on state spending, and protect the people from the threat of government taking an ever larger share of their earnings. Over the past 10 years, state spending has increased 200% while non-farm personal income increased 106%. This amendment includes a provision that allows a two-thirds vote of both houses to override the spending limit in times of emergency.

There is a provision in this amendment which also requires that the state pay for programs it mandates for local government.

Fourth, I propose an amendment to create a bipartisan reapportionment committee. It is time that we remove reapportionment from the political arena. The people of Minnesota deserve a system which is free from partisanship. Our legislative and congressional district boundaries should be drawn to satisfy the best interests of the people, not for the advantage



of anyone political party. And I want to commend this Legislature for having passed this bill for a bipartisan commission in both houses in the last session.

In conclusion, we live in a world filled with strife and controversy. We have quite enough tension. Yet, there seems to be great expectation by some that the next few months of this legislative session may well add to what presently exists.

It need not be so. That which binds us is vastly more enduring than that which divides us.

Let us approach the issues before us with the sense of commitment that serious issues demand if they are to be resolved.



-- With the understanding that the public good must prevail over individual advantage  . .

-- With the courage to lead at a time when leadership may be painful   .

with the strength to persevere even when success may be uncertain . . .

with this kind of spirit we can do what must be done. And having done it, should that question come back before us, "Did our contributions have any lasting significance, any enduring value?" We will be able to say "Yes, yes we have made a difference."

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chief Justice, Associate Justices, Members of the 72nd State Legislature, Fellow Constitutional Officers, Governors, distinguished guests, friends and fellow Minnesotans,
Welcome back. I am looking forward to this legislative session-as I'm sure you are. We have many decisions to make. They will not be easy-they never are. But they will have a lasting impact on the future of this state.
This year the State of the State message cannot be given without looking at the state of the nation. We are gathering at a time of great uncertainty and unrest. Daily we watch the indicators . . . how deep is the recession? when will we start coming out of it? . . . how fast? We try to read the signs. We remain fundamentally hopeful--but realistically cautious, for we are still feeling the pain of a great economy struggling for new life.
We've seen prime interest rates soar to more than 20 percent, a major auto manufacturer 'facing bankruptcy, a sharp rise in unemployment, decline in average weekly earnings, a continued rise in the Consumer Price Index, and drastic declines in new housing.

The Middle East crisis again threatens our oil supplies.

Petroleum prices are increasing.

Energy rich states beckon industries from the energy poor states.

The recession has also hurt state and local governments.

Two years ago, state and local governments across the nation had an annual surplus of $4.2 billion. Now, just two years later, it is predicted their combined deficits will exceed $15 billion.

Minnesota has not been spared the effects of this recession.

Since we met, just nine months ago, many of our people have .been through difficult times--and it's not over yet.

I found it necessary, because of falling revenue receipts, to cut back state spending by $195 million for this fiscal year. If a majority of you in the Legislature can come up with a different way to handle the shortfall, I will be glad to work with you to find an amicable solution for the good of the people, since we still have six months until the end of the biennium.

This recession has meant our citizens have had to tighten their belts and live within their means. Is it any wonder that they expect the federal government, the state government and local government to do the same?
That is why the most important message that can come in this State of the State and the most important accomplishment of this legislative session would be this guarantee:
--No action by this Legislature which will increase the income or sales tax rates.
--No action which will cause property taxes to rise faster than the rate of inflation over the biennium.
Let me tell you why I so firmly believe that we must make this commitment to our people.
First, this recession has hurt. When people are working hard just to meet the house payments and pay the grocery bills, it is not the time to increase their taxes.
Keep in mind that if we compare the fall of 1979 with the fall of 1980, the actual number of jobs available was down 1.3 percent. Keep in mind that Minnesota is 19th among states in per capita income but eighth in the nation for its total tax burden, and 45th when comparing personal income remaining

after state and local taxes. We have the third highest personal income tax
(before indexing), and fourth highest corporate income tax.
Before 1979, before we indexed our state income tax, Minnesotans' income taxes went up more than a third faster than their income. Money came into the state coffers so fast that in the 1978-79 biennium Minnesota's state government spending grew by twice the rate of inflation. Such a practice had to stop or Minnesota state government spending would continue growing at an astronomical rate--we should bear in mind that in the last 14 years, state spending has doubled three times.
That is Why I made indexing the income tax one of the priorities of my campaign. That is why I continue to believe that adoption of indexing was one of the most important tax reforms in Minnesota's history. That is why I will resist any efforts to abandon indexing. This mechanism spreads the income tax brackets so that people whose incomes go up at the rate of inflation stay within the same brackets.
Now, when confronted with requests for new programs, we have to make the choice openly, Do we want to raise taxes and expand services? Or do we not raise taxes and basically let government spending grow at the rate of inflation?
We face that decision this session. It will not be an easy one.

There are still decisions to be made on the budget. I will announce
those in my budget message in three weeks.
In the meantime there are many optimistic signs for Minnesota's
future that should encourage us, We need a larger view of our state's
future than one which looks only at the next budget period.
Consider agriculture which accounts for about 45 percent of
Minnesota's gross state production. We have a tremendous future
demand throughout the world increases for food & fiber.
One of the areas of concern for agriculture is transportation.
If we produce food, and the world needs it, no ore will benefit if we
can't transport goods over highways, rail and water.
I have appointed a Task Force on Highways for Economic Vitality
to review transportation needs and funding. It has finished its work and
will soon send its report to me. Pm also waiting for a report from your Legislative Select Committee on Transportation, as soon as your task force has reported, I will call the two groups together to resolve any differences
and then make my recommendation to you.
Minnesota's future also holds bright prospects for dramatic growth
of our high technology industries.

Futurists predict that we are moving to an "information" society based on very sophisticated or "high" technology. As one informed observer recently said: The United States is rapidly shifting from a mass industrial society to an information society, and the final impact will be more profound than the 19th Century shift from an agricultural to an industrial society.
Minnesota1s computer industry will have a key role in the development of the information society. In several technologies--not just computers- Minnesota may also grow as a national and international leader.
Technology intensive industries provide the state with a broad and resilient economic base of high quality jobs for its citizens. Minnesota is generating small technology industries a rate two to three times the national average. These not only produce exciting jobs for Minnesotans but will assure America its position as the leader in technology production.
Throughout the United States we see five technological centers--Boston, the Washington-Baltimore corridor, the triangle area in North Carolina, Dallas and Houston, San Francisco. In the Midwest, there is no such center. With our industries, with the great research and teaching resources of the University of Minnesota Institute of Technology, we can become that center in the Midwest.
We have a tremendous opportunity for new jobs in high technology industries. And significantly, as we seek to meet our social responsibilities, we should remember that these companies have shown they can serve the central cities and reach minorities and the disadvantaged.

Minnesota's timber resources also give us great cause for optimism for the future.
More than 17 million acres in our state are wooded. That's fully a third of all the land in Minnesota. Almost 14 million acres are commercial forests, administered privately and by the state, federal or county governments.
Timber production and subsequent harvests can be substantially increased with improved timber management. According to the University of Minnesota School of Forestry, Minnesota forest production can be increased 25 to 40 percent.
I will be recommending significant steps to improve forest management. I want to commend the Legislature for the important steps taken by your Legislative Commission on Minnesota Resources. Because of your efforts we are ready for the next step in expanding the production, the harvest, the use, the jobs that will come with development of our timber resources.
As we take a broader look at Minnesota's future let us also remember that we are one of the most minerally rich states in the Union.
Minnesota has 25 percent of the nation's known copper resources and 12 percent of the world's known nickel reserves. Our mines produce 70 percent of the United States' taconite and iron ore. Minnesota has the only known cobalt deposit in the nation.

Even though Northeastern Minnesota has recently had economic difficulties because of a slowing in demand for steel, think what the problems would be without the research of Dr. E. W. Davis of the Mineral Resources Research Center,who developed the process for utilizing taconite. For a decade we have neglected mineral research; we must reverse that neglect and again support adequate minerals research.
Just as the creation of a taconite tax policy helped create that major Minnesota industry, we need tax policies for other minerals, particularly for mining of copper and nickel.
The development of our mineral resources can be of dramatic benefit to the people of our state, but we must extract and process those minerals in a manner which protects the high quality of our environment.
Maintaining the quality of life will also help to keep strong another key industry--tourism--which depends on the great natural beauty of our state.
In 1980, tourism contributed $2 billion to our economy, employed 120,000 Minnesotans and gave us $130 million in tax revenues. We should not forget the contributions of this industry. Our Department of Economic Development will maintain strong support for tourism.

I mentioned petroleum prices and supplies earlier, but there are some points of optimism about energy.
A crude oil pipeline from the south, adequate for our needs, is being constructed now and will be completed by this fall. If Canadian oil is cut off in the future we will have a means of bringing crude oil into Minnesota.
We have been successful in maintaining first priority for Canadian oil.
Money is coming in for development of alternative fuel.
We will be making headway in district heating.
Conservation efforts are paying off both in heating and in transportation: demand for gasoline is down? percent and demand for fuel oil has been reduced 12 percent.
Let me also note that as we continue to be concerned about the potential problem of industry leaving Minnesota for the energy rich Western states, we should not forget that the Western states are short of water. Minnesota is blessed with an abundant supply of good water. That should give us special incentive to make certain our water is conserved and kept clean.
Finally, we must never neglect our most valuable resources--our children-or forget the state's responsibility for their education.

As I have said before, one of the most difficult decisions I have had to make during my administration was to cut state aid to elementary and secondary schools when our revenues fell last summer.
The impact of that cutback was, however, cushioned substantially by the fact that most schools could draw on reserves that they had accumulated. When the $89 million cutback was announced, it was estimated that school districts had $285 million in reserves. These were, of course, accumulated in varying amounts by district. It should be kept in mind that the average amount of the recision equaled $97 per pupil unit. However, 83 percent of the school districts, with over 91 percent of the student&, had reserves in excess of $100 per pupil unit.
Frankly, the main concern I heard when I announced the cutback was not just the impact of the cut this year, but its potential impact in future years. Let me repeat my pledge: I will recommend that we restore the base to the level before the cutback in each year of the next biennium.
I will recommend that we increase the state's share of aid to education by the rate of inflation.
These recommendations will give education the largest dollar increase in the history of the state.
Furthermore, the actions of the last legislative session reduced the local effort in Fiscal Year 1982 from 26 percent of the cost of education to 19.3 percent. In other words, the local property taxes for operating schools raised $412 million in Fiscal Year 1981 and will be reduced to $331 million in Fiscal Year 1982. This means the state will pay 80 percent of the cost of education and local property taxes will fund 20 percent. This funding relationship goes well beyond the intent of the Minnesota Miracle to have the state share 70 percent of education costs. We must rev~ew this funding relationship in the context of a commitment not to increase the income or sales tax rates and not to have property taxes rise faster than the rate of inflation.
With this obligation there is not room to fund my proposal to improve education in the kindergarten through third grade. Explicit state funding for that concept will have to wait, but I will continue to urge:
--That parents and teachers become stronger partners in the child's learning process.
--That schools hold class size down in the early years to provide for more individual instruction.
--That we continue to seek environments free from disruptions which impair students' learning.

As we now begin this 72nd session of the Minnesota Legislature, we take up the task of shaping the future of our great state. Let us be mindful of our past. Let us remember our forefathers who worked to build this great state. They farmed the land, laid out the roads, built the ports, mined the ores, developed the technology. They have given us a great state, strong, diverse, able to provide good jobs for our people.
True, we are in troubled times but we know our parents and grandparents suffered hardships far greater than we have now. Their material goods were less; for most, the physical work was harder, their lives shortened by disease.
We must also remember that during those same years, men and women have come to these halls, setting aside personal gain to seek the public interest. They have given us an outstanding school system, an extensive park system, a broad transportation system, compassionate social services and a national reputation for good government.
The challenge before this legislative session is to respect the contributions over the past century made by millions of private citizens and thousands of public servants and to build on their heritage.
That is an awesome, never-ending task. One that calls forth the best in all of us. Do we have what it takes? Are we equal to it?

Can there be any other answer worthy of us but yes?
Yes, we can do it--
If we have faith in ourselves, faith in our fellow man, faith in our God.
Yes, we can do it if we aspire to work at it, aspire to fulfill our responsibility, aspire to achieve our ideals.
Yes, we can do it if we care--care for those who are different, those less fortunate; care for the impact our actions have on our own families and our children1s children.
Yes, we have what it takes if we ,care enough to work together to get it done.

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chief Justice, Associate Justices, Members of the 72nd State Legislature, Fellow Constitutional Officers, Governors, distinguished guests, friends and fellow Minnesotans:
We know that the national economy is struggling. And because of this, we know that Minnesota's economy is struggling.
But we also know that we will rebound from these difficulties and that we will be stronger for them. This is as certain as our people's strength and our land's abundance.
Just as certain is the fact that government will not be the same in the future as it's been in the past.
In part because of current economic problems; in part because of economic problems that may persist; but in largest part because of winds that awaken the nation, the role state government plays will be different.
It will be more trusting.
The roles local government, families, individuals and the private sector will play will be different too.

They will be larger.
These changes will be good for Minnesota and for our nation.
I want to talk this afternoon about these changing roles and my proposals and ideas for enhancing them in the next year, the next five years and the years beyond. These changes have been spurred, nationally and at home, by millions of votes and millions of voices.
Why do we face our current economic problems? Members of both parties don't agree on every point, but there is uniform agreement on the major cause: a national recession that is hurting 33 states in the same way it's hurting Minnesota.
But there are additional factors causing our projected budget shortfall.
Farm income is down significantly, reducing tax revenues, depressing farm communities and hurting farm families.
And state government has assumed too many obligations.
We must change the current arrangement so that local communities have a greater chance to run their own affairs, free of state intrusion.
We must look to the future realistically and responsibly.

We must change our policies so that we avoid, as much as possible, again having to make the terribly painful and disruptive choices that we must make now.
But more than a change in policy, we need a change in attitude.
Americans have come to realize, in a relatively short period, the real limits on our energy resources and the need to conserve them. In the same way that wasting energy was second nature to many of us a few years ago, saving energy is now instinctive.
We must develop the same responsible attitude toward government and its capacity. Only in this way can we plan wisely,
The times demand that we do better in providing public services. The men and women who carry out these services do a commendable, often excellent job, And our public institutions are not without cause for praise. We must not fall into the trap of criticizing, never nurturing them,
But the fact remains that government has grown too big and too expensive and we must look for new ways of serving the public; new ways that meet our responsibilities as a caring people; but ways that halt the prohibitive rise in the cost of government.
We can find new ways.

The proposals I will make to the 1982 Legislature are in six major areas:
(1) Because jobs mean individual dignity and economic health, I will propose steps to improve the capacity of Minnesota's private sector to create good jobs;
(2) because we must increase equity and local responsibility in education, I will propose improvements in the way in which we fund our schools;
(3) because we must strengthen the relationship people have with local. government, I will propose reforms in the financial relationship between the state and local units of government;
(4) because we must show greater trust in the wisdom and compassion of local officials, I will propose elimination of stifling state mandates and regulations;
(5) because we must find less disruptive ways of settling our public labor-management disputes, I will propose changes in the Public Employees Labor Relations Act (PELRA) so that the public is better protected; and
(6) because drinking drivers are killing innocent people, as well as themselves, I will propose a stronger program to end this utterly senseless carnage by getting them off the road.


Let me describe these initiatives in greater detail.

First, I will propose legislation that will mean more jobs for Minnesotans.

Jobs, jobs, jobs. They are what we must have or else everything falls apart: Individual lives are pained, families break apart and the economy collapses. I'm determined that we do all we can to assure a good future for Minnesota's working men and women.

I propose that we lift the burden that we have heaped on the private sector so that we free the creativity and industry of our people. My program for improving our job climate includes the following points:

--We must bring our workers' compensation system into competitive posture

with those of our neighboring states. This can only be done through substantial

change in the benefit provisions of Minnesota's workers' compensation law. The

report, presented to the Legislature yesterday by Insurance Commissioner

Michael Markman recommends this change as the only way to bring our system into

line with those of neighboring states. We must control costs for employers while

fully maintaining a workers' compensation system that provides adequate benefits

paid promptly and equitably to men and women injured on the job.

--We must improve our unemployment compensation system so that it doesn't run a deficit--as it now does and so that it doesn't have to borrow from the federal government--as it has done for years. Our current system is forced to do this despite the fact that our unemployment rate is significantly lower than the national average. My proposal will lead to a solvent trust fund a more equitable distribution of costs based on the direct experience of employers and assurance that workers who lose their jobs are treated fairly. The proposal will also encourage unemployed workers to obtain suitable employment as soon as possible.
Several points in my job climate proposal call for eliminating obstacles to job growth found in Minnesota's tax system. Changes would take effect in the next biennium.
--We must recognize the importance of small business in the creation of new jobs. Toward this end I recommend that we reduce the corporate tax rate to 6 percent on the first $100,000 of income,
--We must reduce commercial-industrial property taxes. I will recommend that the first $50,000 of commercial-industrial market value be assessed at a reduced rate of 30 percent. Twenty-five percent of commercial-industrial property in the metropolitan area and about 40 percent of such property in nonmetropolitan areas of Minnesota have market values below $50,000.

--And we must bring three additional taxes into conformity with federal schedules: Capital gains taxes, estate taxes, and depreciation rates.
I will also recommend two initiatives that recognize the important role played by high technology in Minnesota's future, and the increasingly important role that must be played by the private sector in helping meet community and' human needs.
--I will propose a challenge grant program that will meet, dollar for dollar, private contributions to three research centers at the University of Minnesota's Institute of Technology. These are the Microelectronics Center, the Productivity Center and the Biotechnology Center.
--I will further propose a corporate social responsibility tax credit. This credit will encourage businesses to help neighborhood and other nonprofit organizations.
This total program will help keep Minnesota competitive with other states as it will get rid of serious obstacles to job growth. Let me make this last point clear: The goal behind this program is not just to get businesses to relocate in Minnesota. Research shows this kind of approach doesn't work well. Rather, the goal is to make certain that we don't have unnecessary disincentives to businesses starting here, coming here, growing here and staying here,

To fund this job climate program I will recommend that the 1 percent increase in the sales tax, that was passed last spring, be continued beyond its scheduled 1983 termination,
For my second initiative, I will propose legislation to significantly reform the basic funding formula for Minnesota school districts in order to assure greater equity and local discretion.
Our current system of school finance is not working well. It does not achieve the equity in educational opportunity that was hoped for when the program was put in place in 1971. Moreover, the current system limits local discretion too much.
I assure you that greater local discretion and improved equity are compatible goals.
In place of the grandfather revenue, declining enrollment revenue and the discretionary revenue programs, I will recommend legislation that will authorize local boards to obtain up to $400 per pupil unit in additional equalized revenue. This will be above the basic equalized foundation allowance. Besides this, school boards would be able to levy above this total if they chose.

The decision about what level of revenue to seek would be that of school boards--not the state.
I will propose that this new program be phased in over three years, starting with the 1983-84 school year.
I also will propose a program to eliminate as many mandates and regulations as possible. This will apply not only to schools, but to other programs as well.
Third, I will propose a series of changes that will improve the relationship between local governments and the state, as well as the relationship between local governments and the people they represent.
These changes recognize that state aid to localities must reflect actual, rather than projected, state revenue. Therefore, I will propose that all state aids dispensed to local governments and schools be paid out in a shared, prorated manner based on actual state revenues. That is, if state revenues are unexpectedly low, local and school aids will fall by that same margin, up to 5 percent of the appropriation. On the other hand, if state revenues are unexpectedly high, local and school aids will increase by the same margin, again by up to 5 percent.

My proposals recognize that our current property tax system is too confusing. Therefore, I will recommend that the homestead credit system be ended and that, instead, homestead property taxes be held down by lowering the portion of market value which is taxable. Taxes would be no higher in this new system than in the current system.
Agricultural property taxes would be held down in the same way by reducing the portion of market value which is taxable. This would make up for the elimination of the homestead credit and the agricultural mill rate credit.
My proposals also recognize that local residents need to understand the real costs of local services and that a useful tension should exist between taxpayers and local officials. Therefore, I will recommend that levy limits for cities, towns and counties, that are scheduled to be lifted in 1983, not be reinstated. Local communities and schools will be better able to decide for themselves how they should conduct their affairs.
Fourth, I will recommend a program to eliminate, now and in the future, unnecessary state mandates and regulations. vJe must free the hands of local officials to the greatest extent possible.
These changes will be made by statute and by departmental action.

To get off to a good start, I will recommend the immediate elimination or amendment of 16 state mandates.
I will recommend the creation of a permanent procedure for cataloging, analyzing and evaluating existing state mandates. The goal will be to remove and amend as many mandates as poss i b1e.
I will recommend that the Office of Local Government in the Department of Energy, Planning and Development be responsible for this job. I have chosen the Office of Local Government, rather than a new task force or commission, so as. to avoid the very duplication and red tape that we must excise.
And I will recommend that all proposed legislation affecting local governments, from this point on, clearly identify potential costs for communities.
Fifth, I will propose changes in PELRA that take into account our experience over the past year. PELRA, as amended in 1980, has produced over 50 strikes.
I will propose amendments in PELRA that will lead to more voluntary settlements and fewer strikes. This will be accomplished by strengthening the role of mediators in the collective bargaining process.

In addition, automatic time frames for strike legalization will be eliminated. This will encourage a greater degree of good.,.faith bargaining and will be fair to all concerned.
And I will propose that certain state hospital workers be given essential status similar to that covering local hospital workers.. This will ensure that mentally ill and other residents of our state institutions receive basic care without interruption,
Sixth, and last, I want to talk about saving lives. I will recommend specific, unflinching steps to get drinking drivers off the road, We must further 1ead the way in ending the nati on I,S amazing indifference to highway death and injury.
Almost seven out of 10 drivers killed in traffic accidents in Minnesota had been drinking beforehand.
I will propose legislation that will enable law enforcement officers to increase their arrests for drinking drivers and to insure that repeat offenders are dealt with more severely and more effectively,

Minnesota already has one of the best driving while intoxicated control systems in the country, and I thank the thousands of law enforcement officials who make it so, but we must do better.
Drivers must know that tough enforcement will become even tougher and that certain and immediate consequences will follow all drinking and driving offenses.
I will propose legislation that will broaden the authority of law enforcement officers to give alcohol tests to traffic violators. Any driver with an alcohol concentration of more than .05 will be considered impaired; and repeat drunken drivers who test .10 or higher will be charged with a gross misdemeanor. Strict enforcement and heavier penalties will be the rule, though we will not back off on our commitment to rehabilitation.
We must convince people that they have the deepest personal responsibility not to drive if they drink.
These, then are the proposals I will be presenting for your consideration this session. They're in keeping with principles of frugality and individual and local responsibility.
But let's look further into the future, beyond the constraints of this legislative session.

We must seek a society in which there are good jobs for everyone who is able to work.
We must seek a society in which communities are warm and neighbors are compassionate.
And we must seek a society in which families are strong, for their loving arms are the arms that hold the nation together.
These, of course, represent noble thoughts more than they do a plan for the future. All good things cannot be, and should not be, in the hands of governmental officials.
What we must expect from public officials is leadership in charting government's course.
The long-term changes I envision in public services are so fundamental that they can only take root outside of government.
As things now stand, government not only funds great numbers of programs, it also manages them. Why? How can we expect government to provide effective and efficient service if there are few alternatives?

Shouldn't people have a greater opportunity to shop around for the services they now receive?
Shouldn't the private sector be given greater opportunity to offer these services at a competitive price?
And shouldn't public officials have substantially more flexibility than they now have in carrying out welfare, sanitation, law enforcement and any number of other public services?
My answer to all these questions is absolutely yes.
For these things to happen, government must become less parochial, less self-protective, and less fearful of competing on the open market. But government cannot accomplish these changes alone, or even lead the way.
Leadership must come from the private sector. I stand ready to offer as much help and encouragement as I can in enabling creative people in the private sector to playa larger role in carrying out needed services that have been monopolized by government.
I also call upon individuals and groups to rethink, in the most fundamental way, the way in which we provide public services. We must make certain that good public services are not dependent on ever-increasing taxes.

Suggestions have been made recently in newspapers and elsewhere that such studies be made. I agree. I have asked Kent Eklund, Commissioner of Energy, Planning and Development, to convene a diverse group, from both in and out of government, to take a sharp look a,t Minnesota's future.
Ladies and gentlemen, these are difficult days.
They are difficult for political leaders who must make decisions that please no one.
They are difficult for employees, both public and private, who are afraid for their jobs.
And they are difficult days for those who foot the bill for government.
As we go about our work this session we must balance two, at times conflicting, goals.
We must provide exemplary public service for the people of Minnesota.
But at the same time, we must remember that these very same people--our neighbors and others who have chosen us to represent them--are in a financial corner, just as our state is.
I urge us to be responsive to their Wishes. Thank you.

